the aineta aryballos is an ancient greek aryballos (a small, spherical flask or vase), made between approximately 625 and 570 bce in the city of corinth in southern greece. approximately 6.35 centimetres (2.50 in) in both height and diameter, it was intended to contain perfumed oil or unguent , and is likely to have been owned by a high-class courtesan ( hetaira ) by the name of aineta. the vase's illegal sale to the british museum in 1865 led to the prosecution of its seller, the athenian professor and art dealer athanasios rhousopoulos , and exposed his widespread involvement in antiquities crime. the vase is inscribed with a portrait, probably that of aineta, who is named in the inscription on the vase. the aryballos is likely to have been found in a grave, probably that of aineta. in 1877, rhousopoulos was fined for selling the vase in contravention of greek law. the case represented a relatively rare successful use of state power against the illegal trade in ancient greek artefacts. ( full article... ) april 23 : national sovereignty and children's day in turkey ( 1920 ) the chandos portrait is the most famous of the portraits that are believed to depict william shakespeare ( c. 23 april 1564 – 23 april 1616). painted between 1600 and 1610, it may have served as the basis for the engraved portrait of shakespeare used in his first folio in 1623. john taylor ( c. 1580–1653) is thought by several scholars to have painted the portrait. it is named for the 3rd duke of chandos , who formerly owned the painting. the portrait was given to the national portrait gallery, london , on its foundation in 1856, and it is listed as the first work in its collection. painting credit: john taylor ; image retouched by dcoetzee wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the wikimedia foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : this wikipedia is written in english . many other wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below.

the aineta aryballos is an ancient greek aryballos (a small, spherical flask or vase), made between approximately 625 and 570 bce in the city of corinth in southern greece. approximately 6.35 centimetres (2.50 in) in both height and diameter, it was intended to contain perfumed oil or unguent , and is likely to have been owned by a high-class courtesan ( hetaira ) by the name of aineta. the vase's illegal sale to the british museum in 1865 led to the prosecution of its seller, the athenian professor and art dealer athanasios rhousopoulos , and exposed his widespread involvement in antiquities crime. the vase is inscribed with a portrait, probably that of aineta, who is named in the inscription on the vase. the aryballos is likely to have been found in a grave, probably that of aineta. in 1877, rhousopoulos was fined for selling the vase in contravention of greek law. the case represented a relatively rare successful use of state power against the illegal trade in ancient greek artefacts. ( full article... ) april 23 : national sovereignty and children's day in turkey ( 1920 ) the chandos portrait is the most famous of the portraits that are believed to depict william shakespeare ( c. 23 april 1564 – 23 april 1616). painted between 1600 and 1610, it may have served as the basis for the engraved portrait of shakespeare used in his first folio in 1623. john taylor ( c. 1580–1653) is thought by several scholars to have painted the portrait. it is named for the 3rd duke of chandos , who formerly owned the painting. the portrait was given to the national portrait gallery, london , on its foundation in 1856, and it is listed as the first work in its collection. painting credit: john taylor ; image retouched by dcoetzee wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the wikimedia foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : this wikipedia is written in english . many other wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below.

explore the vast knowledge of wikipedia through these helpful resources. if you have a specific topic in mind, use wikipedia's search box. if you don't know exactly what you are looking for or wish to explore broad areas, click on a link in the header menu at the top of this page, or begin your browsing below: wikipedia organizes its content into distinct subject classifications, each with further subdivisions. explore the diverse cultures, arts, beliefs, and customs of human societies. discover the wonders of earth's lands, features, inhabitants, and planetary phenomena. dive into the past through written records and scholarly exploration. explore chronological events through our comprehensive timelines. stay up-to-date with encyclopedia entries covering ongoing events. delve into diverse human actions, from leisure and entertainment to industry and warfare. explore the study of quantity, structure, space, and change. understand natural phenomena through empirical evidence, observations, and experiments. learn about collective entities, ethnic groups, and nations. dive deep into fundamental questions about existence, knowledge, values, and more. access comprehensive information collections compiled for easy retrieval. refer to various third-party classification systems linked to wikipedia articles. access sources on specific topics for further reading or verification. explore social-cultural systems, beliefs, ethics, and more. understand collectives, social interactions, political authority, and cultural norms. learn about techniques, skills, methods, and processes in technology and science. get summaries of broad topics with links to subtopics, biographies, and related articles. explore topics in outline format, linking to more detailed articles. find enumerations of specific types, such as lists of countries and people. access featured articles, images, news, and more through thematic portals. access lists of terms with definitions through alphabetical glossaries. browse wikipedia's category pages, which index articles by subject. explore subjects that demand high-quality articles, grouped by importance. explore topics where wikipedias of all languages should have articles. discover wikipedia's best, reviewed and vetted for quality. explore well-written, factually accurate articles that meet editorial standards. listen to wikipedia articles as spoken word recordings.

wikipedia is a free online encyclopedia that anyone can edit, and millions already have . wikipedia's purpose is to benefit readers by presenting information on all branches of knowledge . hosted by the wikimedia foundation , wikipedia consists of freely editable content, with articles that usually contain numerous links guiding readers to more information. written collaboratively by volunteers known as wikipedians , wikipedia articles can be edited by anyone with internet access , except in limited cases in which editing is restricted to prevent disruption or vandalism . since its creation on january 15, 2001 , it has grown into the world's largest reference website , attracting over a billion visitors each month . wikipedia currently has more than sixty-four million articles in more than 300 languages , including 6,985,364 articles in english , with 118,341 active contributors in the past month. wikipedia's fundamental principles are summarized in its five pillars . while the wikipedia community has developed many policies and guidelines , new editors do not need to be familiar with them before they start contributing. anyone can edit wikipedia's text, data, references, and images. the quality of content is more important than the expertise of who contributes it. wikipedia's content must conform with its policies , including being verifiable by published reliable sources . contributions based on personal opinions , beliefs, or personal experiences, unreviewed research , libellous material, and copyright violations are not allowed, and will not remain. wikipedia's software makes it easy to reverse errors, and experienced editors watch and patrol bad edits. wikipedia differs from printed references in important ways . anyone can instantly improve it, add quality information, remove misinformation, and fix errors and vandalism . since wikipedia is continually updated, encyclopedic articles on major news events appear within minutes. for over 24 years, editors have volunteered their time and talents to create history's most comprehensive encyclopedia while providing references and other resources to researchers worldwide (see researching with wikipedia ). in summary, wikipedia has tested the wisdom of the crowd since 2001 and has found that it succeeds. to start editing simply click the edit or edit source button, or the pencil icon , at the top of any non-protected wikipedia page or section.

readers how to report a problem with an article, or find out more information. article subjects problems with articles about you, your company, or somebody you represent. licensing how to copy wikipedia's information, donate your own, or report unlicensed use of your information. donors find out about the process, how to donate, and information about how your money is spent. press and partnerships if you're a member of the press looking to contact wikipedia, or have a business proposal for us. thank you for your interest in contacting wikipedia. before proceeding, some important disclaimers: the links on the left should direct you to how to contact us or resolve problems. if you cannot find your issue listed there, you can email helpful, experienced volunteers at info-en wikimedia.org . please refrain from emailing about disagreements with content; they will not be resolved via email.

this page provides help with the most common questions about wikipedia . you can also search wikipedia's help pages using the search box below, or browse the help menu or the help directory . the readers' faq and our about page contain the most commonly sought information about wikipedia. for simple searches, there is a search bar at the top of every page. type what you are looking for in the box. suggested matches will appear in a dropdown list. select any page in the list to go to that page. or, select the "search" button, or press ↵ enter , to go to a full search result. for advanced searches, see help:searching . there are other ways to browse and explore wikipedia articles; many can be found at wikipedia:contents . see our disclaimer for cautions about wikipedia's limitations. for mobile access , press the mobile view link at the very bottom of every desktop view page. contributing is easy: see how to edit a page . for a quick summary on participating, see contributing to wikipedia , and for a friendly tutorial, see our introduction . for a listing of introductions and tutorials by topic, see getting started . the simplified manual of style and cheatsheet can remind you of basic wiki markup . be bold in improving articles! when adding facts, please provide references so others may verify them. if you are affiliated with the article subject, please see our conflict of interest guideline . the simple guide to vandalism cleanup can help you undo malicious edits. if you're looking for places you can help out, the task center is the place to go, or check out what else is happening at the community portal . you can practice editing and experiment in a sandbox your sandbox . if there is a problem with an article about yourself, a family member, a friend or a colleague, please read biographies of living persons/help . if you spot a problem with an article, you can fix it directly, by clicking on the "edit" link at the top of that page. see the "edit an article" section of this page for more information. if you don't feel ready to fix the article yourself, post a message on the article's talk page . this will bring the matter to the attention of others who work on that article. there is a "talk" link at the beginning of every article page. you can contact us . if it's an article about you or your organization, see contact us – subjects . check your first article to see if your topic is appropriate, then the article wizard will walk you through creating the article. once you have created an article, see writing better articles for guidance on how to improve it and what to include (like reference citations ). for contributing images, audio or video files, see the introduction to uploading images . then the upload wizard will guide you through that process. answers to common problems can be found at frequently asked questions . or check out where to ask questions or make comments . new users should seek help at the teahouse if they're having problems while editing wikipedia. more complex questions can be posed at the help desk . volunteers will respond as soon as they're able. or ask for help on your talk page and a volunteer will visit you there! you can get live help with editing in the help chatroom . for help with technical issues, ask at the village pump . if searching wikipedia has not answered your question ( for example, questions like "which country has the world's largest fishing fleet?" ), try the reference desk . volunteers there will attempt to answer your questions on any topic, or point you toward the information you need. where to request changing your account name depends on the type of rename:

talk pages navigating wikipedia manual of style conclusion

this page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about english wikipedia. new to wikipedia ? see the contributing to wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. for a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory . for a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the dashboard . welcome to the community bulletin board , which is a page used for announcements from wikiprojects and other groups. included here are coordinated efforts, events, projects, and other general announcements. also consider posting wikiproject, task force, and collaboration news at the signpost ' s wikiproject report page. please include your signature when adding a listing here. latest tech news from the wikimedia technical community. please tell other users about these changes. not all changes will affect you. translations are available. tech news prepared by tech news writers and posted by bot • contribute • translate • get help • give feedback • subscribe or unsubscribe . discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via requests for comment : you can help improve the articles listed below! this list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (see wikipedia:maintenance or the task center for further information.) help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women . help improve popular pages , especially those of low quality . previous selections: honshu · plate (dishware) · jack black you can usually move a page to a new title by clicking on the move tab at the top of the page. this preserves the edit history by transferring the edit history along with the page move. the talk page , will be moved as well, if you check the box requesting that. when a page is moved, a redirect is automatically created at the old location. please fix any double redirects that result. use the "what links here" link in the left hand column of any page to find the double redirects so you can edit them and point them to the new page name. moving a page in this way is not possible in some cases, such as when a page other than a fresh redirect exists at the destination, or when the page is move protected, but you can ask for help at wikipedia:requested moves . please do not " cut and paste " to move the text to its new location, because this leaves the page history behind. thank you.

thank you for offering to contribute an image or other media file for use on wikipedia. this wizard will guide you through a questionnaire prompting you for the appropriate copyright and sourcing information for each file. please ensure you understand copyright and the image use policy before proceeding. uploads locally to the english wikipedia; must comply with the non-free content criteria sorry, in order to use this uploading script, javascript must be enabled. you can still use the plain special:upload page to upload files to the english wikipedia without javascript. sorry, in order to use this uploading script and to upload files, you need to be logged in with your named account. please log in and then try again. sorry, in order to upload files on the english wikipedia, you need to have a confirmed account . normally, your account will become confirmed automatically once you have made 10 edits and four days have passed since you created it. you may already be able to upload files on the wikimedia commons , but you can't do it on the english wikipedia just yet. if the file you want to upload has a free license, please go to commons and upload it there. important note: if you don't want to wait until you are autoconfirmed, you may ask somebody else to upload a file for you at wikipedia:files for upload . in very rare cases an administrator may make your account confirmed manually through a request at wikipedia:requests for permissions/confirmed . sorry, a few special characters and character combinations cannot be used in the filename for technical reasons. this goes especially for # < > [ ] | : { } / and ~~~ . your filename has been modified to avoid these. please check if it is okay now. the filename you chose seems to be very short, or overly generic. please don't use: if you upload your file with this name, you will be masking the existing file and make it inaccessible. your new file will be displayed everywhere the existing file was previously used. this should not be done, except in very rare exceptional cases. please don't upload your file under this name, unless you seriously know what you are doing. choose a different name for your new file instead. if you upload your file with this name, you will be overwriting the existing file. your new file will be displayed everywhere the existing file was previously used. please don't do this, unless you have a good reason to: it is very important that you read through the following options and questions, and provide all required information truthfully and carefully. wikipedia loves free files. however, we would love it even more if you uploaded them on our sister project, wikimedia commons . files uploaded on commons can be used immediately here on wikipedia as well as on all its sister projects. uploading files on commons works just the same as here. your wikipedia account will automatically work on commons too. however, if you prefer to do it here instead, you may go ahead with this form. you can also first use this form to collect the information about your file and then send it to commons from here. please note that by "entirely self-made" we really mean just that. editors who falsely declare such items as their "own work" will be blocked from editing . use this only if there is an explicit licensing statement in the source. the website must explicitly say that the image is released under a license that allows free re-use for any purpose, e.g. the creative commons attribution license. you must be able to point exactly to where it says this. if the source website doesn't say so explicitly, please do not upload the file . public domain means that nobody owns any copyrights on this work. it does not mean simply that it is freely viewable somewhere on the web or that it has been widely used by others. this is not for images you simply found somewhere on the web. most images on the web are under copyright and belong to somebody, even if you believe the owner won't care about that copyright. if it is in the public domain, you must be able to point to an actual law that makes it so. if you can't point to such a law but merely found this image somewhere, then please do not upload it. please remember that you will need to demonstrate that: enter the name of exactly one wikipedia article, without the [[...]] brackets and without the "http://en.wikipedia.org/..." url code. it has to be an actual article, not a talkpage, template, user page, etc. if you plan to use the file in more than one article, please name only one of them here. then, after uploading, open the image description page for editing and add your separate explanations for each additional article manually. please check the spelling, and make sure you enter the name of an existing article in which you will include this file. if this is an article you are only planning to write, please write it first and upload the file afterwards. the page example is not in the main article namespace. non-free files can only be used in mainspace article pages, not on a user page, talk page, template, etc. please upload this file only if it is going to be used in an actual article. if this page is an article draft in your user space, we're sorry, but we must ask you to wait until the page is ready and has been moved into mainspace, and only upload the file after that. the page example is not a real article, but a disambiguation page pointing to a number of other pages. please check and enter the exact title of the actual target article you meant. if neither of these two statements applies, then please do not upload this image. this section is not for images used merely to illustrate an article about a person or thing, showing what that person or thing look like. in view of this, please explain how the use of this file will be minimal. well, we're very sorry, but if you're not sure about this file's copyright status, or if it doesn't fit into any of the groups above, then: really, please don't. even if you think it would make for a great addition to an article. we really take these copyright rules very seriously on wikipedia. note that media is assumed to be fully-copyrighted unless shown otherwise; the burden is on the uploader. if you are in any doubt, please ask some experienced editors for advice before uploading. people will be happy to assist you at wikipedia:media copyright questions . thank you. this might take a minute or two, depending on the size of the file and the speed of your internet connection. once uploading is completed, you will find your new file at this link: your file has been uploaded successfully and can now be found here: please follow the link and check that the image description page has all the information you meant to include. if you want to change the description, just go to the image page, click the "edit" tab at the top of the page and edit just as you would edit any other page. do not go through this upload form again, unless you want to replace the actual file with a new version. to insert this file into an article, you may want to use code similar to the following: if you wish to make a link to the file in text, without actually showing the image, for instance when discussing the image on a talk page, you can use the following (mark the ":" after the initial brackets!): see wikipedia:picture tutorial for more detailed help on how to insert and position images in pages. thank you for using the file upload wizard. please leave your feedback, comments, bug reports or suggestions on the talk page .

if you have a question related to the main page, please search the talk page archives first to check if it has previously been addressed: 001 002 003 004 005 006 007 008 009 010 011 012 013 014 015 016 017 018 019 020 021 022 023 024 025 026 027 028 029 030 031 032 033 034 035 036 037 038 039 040 041 042 043 044 045 046 047 048 049 050 051 052 053 054 055 056 057 058 059 060 061 062 063 064 065 066 067 068 069 070 071 072 073 074 075 076 077 078 079 080 081 082 083 084 085 086 087 088 089 090 091 092 093 094 095 096 097 098 099 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 to report an error in content currently or imminently on the main page , use the appropriate section below. the 'in the news' section on our main page looks more like a sports page than a news forum. currently there are three spots related stories in this section the story at the top, which has been posted at least two days, "a nightclub roof collapse in santo domingo", while interesting, is certainly not world headline news. rarely do we see the latest breaking events where it concerns e.g. ukraine, israel-gaza, etc as the lead story. the latest ukraine missile attack in sumy should be the top story right about now. we should be seeing more top story news, and fewer stories about sports figures that only appeal to fans of the respective sport involved. -- gwillhickers ( talk ) 18:01, 15 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] the jet set nightclub roof collapse mentioned above had 231 fatalities which is very significant. for context, this is about 7.75% of the fatalities in the 9/11 attack and one of the largest losses of life in the country outside of natural disasters. the "ongoing" section covers the various conflicts so that individual battles and attacks don't dominate the itn space. there is a reason why sports and elections tends to dominate: which is they're straight forward and objective, thus they pass through the approval process much more easily. through happensatance, there tends to be a lot of sports stories now. you and anyone else is free to nominate an article at wikipedia:in the news/candidates harizotoh9 ( talk ) 21:46, 17 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] how do you define "active"? the 118,000 figure is wildly exaggerated and seems to be full of newbies and vandals. i doubt there's more than a quarter of those we could truly consider active and productive. it was 124,000 a few days ago. i'd rather see an accurate and useful figure of how many articles of quality we have. ♦ dr. blofeld 14:35, 22 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] on the page wikipedia:main page/yesterday , please change: to mirror the changes done to the main page in special:diff/1225315602/1276485694 . —⁠ andrybak ( talk ) 01:16, 23 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ]

thank you for offering to contribute an image or other media file for use on wikipedia. this wizard will guide you through a questionnaire prompting you for the appropriate copyright and sourcing information for each file. please ensure you understand copyright and the image use policy before proceeding. uploads locally to the english wikipedia; must comply with the non-free content criteria sorry, in order to use this uploading script, javascript must be enabled. you can still use the plain special:upload page to upload files to the english wikipedia without javascript. sorry, in order to use this uploading script and to upload files, you need to be logged in with your named account. please log in and then try again. sorry, in order to upload files on the english wikipedia, you need to have a confirmed account . normally, your account will become confirmed automatically once you have made 10 edits and four days have passed since you created it. you may already be able to upload files on the wikimedia commons , but you can't do it on the english wikipedia just yet. if the file you want to upload has a free license, please go to commons and upload it there. important note: if you don't want to wait until you are autoconfirmed, you may ask somebody else to upload a file for you at wikipedia:files for upload . in very rare cases an administrator may make your account confirmed manually through a request at wikipedia:requests for permissions/confirmed . sorry, a few special characters and character combinations cannot be used in the filename for technical reasons. this goes especially for # < > [ ] | : { } / and ~~~ . your filename has been modified to avoid these. please check if it is okay now. the filename you chose seems to be very short, or overly generic. please don't use: if you upload your file with this name, you will be masking the existing file and make it inaccessible. your new file will be displayed everywhere the existing file was previously used. this should not be done, except in very rare exceptional cases. please don't upload your file under this name, unless you seriously know what you are doing. choose a different name for your new file instead. if you upload your file with this name, you will be overwriting the existing file. your new file will be displayed everywhere the existing file was previously used. please don't do this, unless you have a good reason to: it is very important that you read through the following options and questions, and provide all required information truthfully and carefully. wikipedia loves free files. however, we would love it even more if you uploaded them on our sister project, wikimedia commons . files uploaded on commons can be used immediately here on wikipedia as well as on all its sister projects. uploading files on commons works just the same as here. your wikipedia account will automatically work on commons too. however, if you prefer to do it here instead, you may go ahead with this form. you can also first use this form to collect the information about your file and then send it to commons from here. please note that by "entirely self-made" we really mean just that. editors who falsely declare such items as their "own work" will be blocked from editing . use this only if there is an explicit licensing statement in the source. the website must explicitly say that the image is released under a license that allows free re-use for any purpose, e.g. the creative commons attribution license. you must be able to point exactly to where it says this. if the source website doesn't say so explicitly, please do not upload the file . public domain means that nobody owns any copyrights on this work. it does not mean simply that it is freely viewable somewhere on the web or that it has been widely used by others. this is not for images you simply found somewhere on the web. most images on the web are under copyright and belong to somebody, even if you believe the owner won't care about that copyright. if it is in the public domain, you must be able to point to an actual law that makes it so. if you can't point to such a law but merely found this image somewhere, then please do not upload it. please remember that you will need to demonstrate that: enter the name of exactly one wikipedia article, without the [[...]] brackets and without the "http://en.wikipedia.org/..." url code. it has to be an actual article, not a talkpage, template, user page, etc. if you plan to use the file in more than one article, please name only one of them here. then, after uploading, open the image description page for editing and add your separate explanations for each additional article manually. please check the spelling, and make sure you enter the name of an existing article in which you will include this file. if this is an article you are only planning to write, please write it first and upload the file afterwards. the page example is not in the main article namespace. non-free files can only be used in mainspace article pages, not on a user page, talk page, template, etc. please upload this file only if it is going to be used in an actual article. if this page is an article draft in your user space, we're sorry, but we must ask you to wait until the page is ready and has been moved into mainspace, and only upload the file after that. the page example is not a real article, but a disambiguation page pointing to a number of other pages. please check and enter the exact title of the actual target article you meant. if neither of these two statements applies, then please do not upload this image. this section is not for images used merely to illustrate an article about a person or thing, showing what that person or thing look like. in view of this, please explain how the use of this file will be minimal. well, we're very sorry, but if you're not sure about this file's copyright status, or if it doesn't fit into any of the groups above, then: really, please don't. even if you think it would make for a great addition to an article. we really take these copyright rules very seriously on wikipedia. note that media is assumed to be fully-copyrighted unless shown otherwise; the burden is on the uploader. if you are in any doubt, please ask some experienced editors for advice before uploading. people will be happy to assist you at wikipedia:media copyright questions . thank you. this might take a minute or two, depending on the size of the file and the speed of your internet connection. once uploading is completed, you will find your new file at this link: your file has been uploaded successfully and can now be found here: please follow the link and check that the image description page has all the information you meant to include. if you want to change the description, just go to the image page, click the "edit" tab at the top of the page and edit just as you would edit any other page. do not go through this upload form again, unless you want to replace the actual file with a new version. to insert this file into an article, you may want to use code similar to the following: if you wish to make a link to the file in text, without actually showing the image, for instance when discussing the image on a talk page, you can use the following (mark the ":" after the initial brackets!): see wikipedia:picture tutorial for more detailed help on how to insert and position images in pages. thank you for using the file upload wizard. please leave your feedback, comments, bug reports or suggestions on the talk page .

wikipedia [ b ] is a free online encyclopedia , written and maintained by a community of volunteers , known as wikipedians , through open collaboration and the wiki software mediawiki . founded by jimmy wales and larry sanger on january 15, 2001, wikipedia has been hosted since 2003 by the wikimedia foundation , an american nonprofit organization funded mainly by donations from readers. [ 2 ] wikipedia is the largest and most-read reference work in history. [ 3 ] [ 4 ] initially available only in english, wikipedia now exists in more than 300 languages . the english wikipedia , with over 6 million articles, remains the largest of the editions, which together comprise more than 64 million articles and attract more than 1.5 billion unique device visits and 13 million edits per month (about 5 edits per second on average) as of april 2024 [update] . [ w 1 ] as of march 2025 [update] , over 25% of wikipedia's traffic comes from the united states , followed by japan at 6.38%, the united kingdom at 5.81%, germany at 4.97%, russia at 4.86%, and the remaining 52.25% split among other countries. [ 5 ] wikipedia has been praised for enabling the democratization of knowledge , its extensive coverage, unique structure, and culture. wikipedia has been censored by some national governments, ranging from specific pages to the entire site. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] although wikipedia's volunteer editors have written extensively on a wide variety of topics, the encyclopedia has been criticized for systemic bias , such as a gender bias against women and geographical bias against the global south ( eurocentrism ). [ 8 ] [ 9 ] while the reliability of wikipedia was frequently criticized in the 2000s, it has improved over time, receiving greater praise from the late 2010s onward, [ 3 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] while becoming an important fact-checking site . [ 12 ] [ 13 ] articles on breaking news are often accessed as sources for up-to-date information about those events. [ 14 ] [ 15 ] various collaborative online encyclopedias were attempted before the start of wikipedia, but with limited success. [ 16 ] wikipedia began as a complementary project for nupedia, a free online english-language encyclopedia project whose articles were written by experts and reviewed under a formal process. [ 17 ] it was founded on march 9, 2000, under the ownership of bomis , a web portal company. its main figures were bomis ceo jimmy wales and larry sanger , editor-in-chief for nupedia and later wikipedia. [ 1 ] [ 18 ] nupedia was initially licensed under its own nupedia open content license, but before wikipedia was founded, nupedia switched to the gnu free documentation license at the urging of richard stallman . [ w 2 ] wales is credited with defining the goal of making a publicly editable encyclopedia, [ 19 ] [ w 3 ] while sanger is credited with the strategy of using a wiki to reach that goal. [ w 4 ] on january 10, 2001, sanger proposed on the nupedia mailing list to create a wiki as a "feeder" project for nupedia. [ w 5 ] wikipedia was launched on january 15, 2001 [ 17 ] (referred to as wikipedia day ) as a single english language edition with the domain name www.wikipedia.com , [ w 6 ] and was announced by sanger on the nupedia mailing list. [ 19 ] the name originated from a blend of the words wiki and encyclopedia . [ 20 ] [ 21 ] its integral policy of "neutral point-of-view" [ w 7 ] was codified in its first few months. otherwise, there were initially relatively few rules, and it operated independently of nupedia. [ 19 ] bomis originally intended for it to be a for-profit business. [ 22 ] wikipedia gained early contributors from nupedia, slashdot postings, and web search engine indexing. language editions were created beginning in march 2001, with a total of 161 in use by the end of 2004. [ w 8 ] [ w 9 ] nupedia and wikipedia coexisted until the former's servers were taken down permanently in 2003, and its text was incorporated into wikipedia. the english wikipedia passed the mark of 2 million articles on september 9, 2007, making it the largest encyclopedia ever assembled, surpassing the yongle encyclopedia made in china during the ming dynasty in 1408, which had held the record for almost 600 years. [ 23 ] citing fears of commercial advertising and lack of control, users of the spanish wikipedia forked from wikipedia to create enciclopedia libre in february 2002. [ w 10 ] wales then announced that wikipedia would not display advertisements, and changed wikipedia's domain from wikipedia.com to wikipedia.org . [ 24 ] [ w 11 ] after an early period of exponential growth, [ 25 ] the growth rate of the english wikipedia in terms of the numbers of new articles and of editors, appears to have peaked around early 2007. [ 26 ] the edition reached 3 million articles in august 2009. around 1,800 articles were added daily to the encyclopedia in 2006; by 2013 that average was roughly 800. [ w 12 ] a team at the palo alto research center attributed this slowing of growth to "increased coordination and overhead costs, exclusion of newcomers, and resistance to new edits". [ 25 ] others suggest that the growth is flattening naturally because articles that could be called " low-hanging fruit "—topics that clearly merit an article—have already been created and built up extensively. [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] in november 2009, a researcher at the rey juan carlos university in madrid, spain found that the english wikipedia had lost 49,000 editors during the first three months of 2009; in comparison, it lost only 4,900 editors during the same period in 2008. [ 30 ] [ 31 ] the wall street journal cited the array of rules applied to editing and disputes related to such content among the reasons for this trend. [ 32 ] wales disputed these claims in 2009, denying the decline and questioning the study's methodology. [ 33 ] two years later, in 2011, he acknowledged a slight decline, noting a decrease from "a little more than 36,000 writers" in june 2010 to 35,800 in june 2011. in the same interview, he also claimed the number of editors was "stable and sustainable". [ 34 ] a 2013 mit technology review article, "the decline of wikipedia", questioned this claim, reporting that since 2007 wikipedia had lost a third of its volunteer editors, and suggesting that those remaining had focused increasingly on minutiae. [ 35 ] in july 2012, the atlantic reported that the number of administrators was also in decline. [ 36 ] in the november 25, 2013, issue of new york magazine, katherine ward stated, "wikipedia, the sixth-most-used website, is facing an internal crisis." [ 37 ] the number of active english wikipedia editors has since remained steady after a long period of decline. [ 38 ] [ 39 ] in january 2007, wikipedia first became one of the ten most popular websites in the united states, according to comscore networks. [ 40 ] with 42.9 million unique visitors, it was ranked ninth, surpassing the new york times (#10) and apple (#11). [ 40 ] this marked a significant increase over january 2006, when wikipedia ranked 33rd, with around 18.3 million unique visitors. [ 41 ] in 2014, it received 8 billion page views every month. [ w 13 ] on february 9, 2014, the new york times reported that wikipedia had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month, "according to the ratings firm comscore". [ 42 ] as of march 2023 [update] , it ranked sixth in popularity, according to similarweb . [ 43 ] loveland and reagle argue that, in process, wikipedia follows a long tradition of historical encyclopedias that have accumulated improvements piecemeal through " stigmergic accumulation". [ 44 ] [ 45 ] on january 18, 2012, the english wikipedia participated in a series of coordinated protests against two proposed laws in the united states congress —the stop online piracy act (sopa) and the protect ip act (pipa)—by blacking out its pages for 24 hours . [ 46 ] more than 162 million people viewed the blackout explanation page that temporarily replaced its content. [ 47 ] [ w 14 ] in january 2013, 274301 wikipedia , an asteroid , was named after wikipedia; [ 48 ] in october 2014, wikipedia was honored with the wikipedia monument ; [ 49 ] and, in july 2015, 106 of the 7,473 700-page volumes of wikipedia became available as print wikipedia . [ 50 ] in april 2019, an israeli lunar lander , beresheet , crash landed on the surface of the moon carrying a copy of nearly all of the english wikipedia engraved on thin nickel plates; experts say the plates likely survived the crash. [ 51 ] [ 52 ] in june 2019, scientists reported that all 16 gb of article text from the english wikipedia had been encoded into synthetic dna . [ 53 ] on january 20, 2014, subodh varma reporting for the economic times indicated that not only had wikipedia's growth stalled, it "had lost nearly ten percent of its page views last year. there was a decline of about 2 billion between december 2012 and december 2013. its most popular versions are leading the slide: page-views of the english wikipedia declined by twelve percent, those of german version slid by 17 percent and the japanese version lost 9 percent." [ 54 ] varma added, "while wikipedia's managers think that this could be due to errors in counting, other experts feel that google's knowledge graphs project launched last year may be gobbling up wikipedia users." [ 54 ] when contacted on this matter, clay shirky , associate professor at new york university and fellow at harvard's berkman klein center for internet & society said that he suspected much of the page-view decline was due to knowledge graphs, stating, "if you can get your question answered from the search page, you don't need to click [any further]." [ 54 ] by the end of december 2016, wikipedia was ranked the fifth most popular website globally. [ 55 ] as of january 2023, 55,791 english wikipedia articles have been cited 92,300 times in scholarly journals, [ 56 ] from which cloud computing was the most cited page. [ 57 ] on january 18, 2023, wikipedia debuted a new website redesign, called "vector 2022". [ 58 ] [ 59 ] it featured a redesigned menu bar , moving the table of contents to the left as a sidebar , and numerous changes in the locations of buttons like the language selection tool. [ 59 ] [ w 15 ] the update initially received backlash, most notably when editors of the swahili wikipedia unanimously voted to revert the changes. [ 58 ] [ 60 ] unlike traditional encyclopedias, wikipedia follows the procrastination principle regarding the security of its content, meaning that it waits until a problem arises to fix it. [ 61 ] due to wikipedia's increasing popularity, some editions, including the english version, have introduced editing restrictions for certain cases. for instance, on the english wikipedia and some other language editions, only registered users may create a new article. [ w 16 ] on the english wikipedia, among others, particularly controversial, sensitive, or vandalism-prone pages have been protected to varying degrees. [ w 17 ] [ 62 ] a frequently vandalized article can be "semi-protected" or "extended confirmed protected", meaning that only "autoconfirmed" or "extended confirmed" editors can modify it. [ w 17 ] a particularly contentious article may be locked so that only administrators can make changes. [ w 18 ] a 2021 article in the columbia journalism review identified wikipedia's page-protection policies as "perhaps the most important" means at its disposal to "regulate its market of ideas". [ 63 ] in certain cases, all editors are allowed to submit modifications, but review is required for some editors, depending on certain conditions. for example, the german wikipedia maintains "stable versions" of articles which have passed certain reviews. [ w 19 ] following protracted trials and community discussion, the english wikipedia introduced the "pending changes" system in december 2012. [ 64 ] under this system, new and unregistered users' edits to certain controversial or vandalism-prone articles are reviewed by established users before they are published. [ 65 ] however, restrictions on editing may reduce the editor engagement as well as efforts to diversify the editing community. [ 66 ] although changes are not systematically reviewed, wikipedia's software provides tools allowing anyone to review changes made by others. each article's history page links to each revision. [ d ] [ 67 ] on most articles, anyone can view the latest changes and undo others' revisions by clicking a link on the article's history page. registered users may maintain a "watchlist" of articles that interest them so they can be notified of changes. [ w 20 ] "new pages patrol" is a process where newly created articles are checked for obvious problems. [ w 21 ] in 2003, economics phd student andrea ciffolilli argued that the low transaction costs of participating in a wiki created a catalyst for collaborative development, and that features such as allowing easy access to past versions of a page favored "creative construction" over "creative destruction". [ 68 ] any change that deliberately compromises wikipedia's integrity is considered vandalism. the most common and obvious types of vandalism include additions of obscenities and crude humor; it can also include advertising and other types of spam. [ 69 ] sometimes editors commit vandalism by removing content or entirely blanking a given page. less common types of vandalism, such as the deliberate addition of plausible but false information, can be more difficult to detect. vandals can introduce irrelevant formatting, modify page semantics such as the page's title or categorization, manipulate the article's underlying code, or use images disruptively. [ w 22 ] obvious vandalism is generally easy to remove from wikipedia articles; the median time to detect and fix it is a few minutes. [ 70 ] [ 71 ] however, some vandalism takes much longer to detect and repair. [ 72 ] in the seigenthaler biography incident , an anonymous editor introduced false information into the biography of american political figure john seigenthaler in may 2005, falsely presenting him as a suspect in the assassination of john f. kennedy . [ 72 ] it remained uncorrected for four months. [ 72 ] seigenthaler, the founding editorial director of usa today and founder of the freedom forum first amendment center at vanderbilt university , called wikipedia co-founder jimmy wales and asked whether he had any way of knowing who contributed the misinformation. wales said he did not, although the perpetrator was eventually traced. [ 73 ] [ 74 ] after the incident, seigenthaler described wikipedia as "a flawed and irresponsible research tool". [ 72 ] the incident led to policy changes at wikipedia for tightening up the verifiability of biographical articles of living people. [ 75 ] wikipedia editors often have disagreements regarding content, which can be discussed on article talk pages. disputes may result in repeated competing changes to an article, known as "edit warring". [ w 23 ] [ 76 ] it is widely seen as a resource-consuming scenario where no useful knowledge is added, [ 77 ] and criticized as creating a competitive [ 78 ] and conflict-based editing culture associated with traditional masculine gender roles . [ 79 ] [ 80 ] research has focused on, for example, impoliteness of disputes, [ 81 ] [ 82 ] the influence of rival editing camps, [ 83 ] [ 84 ] the conversational structure, [ 85 ] and the shift in conflicts to a focus on sources. [ 86 ] [ 87 ] taha yasseri of the university of oxford examined editing conflicts and their resolution in a 2013 study. [ 88 ] [ 89 ] yasseri contended that simple reverts or "undo" operations were not the most significant measure of counterproductive work behavior at wikipedia. he relied instead on "mutually reverting edit pairs", where one editor reverts the edit of another editor who then, in sequence, returns to revert the first editor. the results were tabulated for several language versions of wikipedia. the english wikipedia's three largest conflict rates belonged to the articles george w. bush , anarchism , and muhammad . [ 89 ] by comparison, for the german wikipedia, the three largest conflict rates at the time of the study were for the articles covering croatia , scientology , and 9/11 conspiracy theories . [ 89 ] in 2020, researchers identified other measures of editor behaviors, beyond mutual reverts, to identify editing conflicts across wikipedia. [ 90 ] editors also debate the deletion of articles on wikipedia , with roughly 500,000 such debates since wikipedia's inception. once an article is nominated for deletion, the dispute is typically determined by initial votes (to keep or delete) and by reference to topic-specific notability policies. [ 91 ] content in wikipedia is subject to the laws (in particular, copyright laws) of the united states and of the us state of virginia , where the majority of wikipedia's servers are located. [ w 24 ] [ w 25 ] by using the site, one agrees to the wikimedia foundation terms of use and privacy policy ; some of the main rules are that contributors are legally responsible for their edits and contributions, that they should follow the policies that govern each of the independent project editions, and they may not engage in activities, whether legal or illegal, that may be harmful to other users. [ w 26 ] [ w 27 ] in addition to the terms, the foundation has developed policies, described as the "official policies of the wikimedia foundation". [ w 28 ] the fundamental principles of the wikipedia community are embodied in the "five pillars", while the detailed editorial principles are expressed in numerous policies and guidelines intended to appropriately shape content. [ w 29 ] the five pillars are: the rules developed by the community are stored in wiki form, and wikipedia editors write and revise the website's policies and guidelines in accordance with community consensus. [ 92 ] editors can enforce the rules by deleting or modifying non-compliant material. [ w 30 ] originally, rules on the non-english editions of wikipedia were based on a translation of the rules for the english wikipedia. they have since diverged to some extent. [ w 19 ] according to the rules on the english wikipedia community, each entry in wikipedia must be about a topic that is encyclopedic and is not a dictionary entry or dictionary-style. [ w 31 ] a topic should also meet wikipedia's standards of "notability" , which generally means that the topic must have been covered in mainstream media or major academic journal sources that are independent of the article's subject. [ w 32 ] further, wikipedia intends to convey only knowledge that is already established and recognized. [ w 33 ] it must not present original research. [ w 34 ] a claim that is likely to be challenged requires a reference to a reliable source, as do all quotations. [ w 31 ] among wikipedia editors, this is often phrased as "verifiability, not truth" to express the idea that the readers, not the encyclopedia, are ultimately responsible for checking the truthfulness of the articles and making their own interpretations. [ w 35 ] this can at times lead to the removal of information which, though valid, is not properly sourced. [ 93 ] finally, wikipedia must not take sides. [ w 36 ] as wikipedia policies changed over time, and became more complex, their number has grown. in 2008, there were 44 policy pages and 248 guideline pages; by 2013, scholars counted 383 policy pages and 449 guideline pages. [ 94 ] wikipedia's initial anarchy integrated democratic and hierarchical elements over time. [ 95 ] [ 96 ] an article is not considered to be owned by its creator or any other editor, nor by the subject of the article. [ w 37 ] editors in good standing in the community can request extra user rights , granting them the technical ability to perform certain special actions. in particular, editors can choose to run for " adminship ", [ 97 ] which includes the ability to delete pages or prevent them from being changed in cases of severe vandalism or editorial disputes. [ w 38 ] administrators are not supposed to enjoy any special privilege in decision-making; instead, their powers are mostly limited to making edits that have project-wide effects and thus are disallowed to ordinary editors, and to implement restrictions intended to prevent disruptive editors from making unproductive edits. [ w 38 ] by 2012, fewer editors were becoming administrators compared to wikipedia's earlier years, in part because the process of vetting potential administrators had become more rigorous. [ 98 ] in 2022, there was a particularly contentious request for adminship over the candidate's anti-trump views; ultimately, they were granted adminship. [ 99 ] wikipedia has delegated some administrative functions to bots , such as when granting privileges to human editors. such algorithmic governance has an ease of implementation and scaling, though the automated rejection of edits may have contributed to a downturn in active wikipedia editors. [ 94 ] over time, wikipedia has developed a semi-formal dispute resolution process. to determine community consensus, editors can raise issues at appropriate community forums, seek outside input through third opinion requests, or initiate a more general community discussion known as a "request for comment". [ w 23 ] wikipedia encourages local resolutions of conflicts, which jemielniak argues is quite unique in organization studies, though there has been some recent interest in consensus building in the field. [ 100 ] joseph reagle and sue gardner argue that the approaches to consensus building are similar to those used by quakers . [ 100 ] : 62 a difference from quaker meetings is the absence of a facilitator in the presence of disagreement, a role played by the clerk in quaker meetings. [ 100 ] : 83 the arbitration committee presides over the ultimate dispute resolution process. although disputes usually arise from a disagreement between two opposing views on how an article should read, the arbitration committee explicitly refuses to directly rule on the specific view that should be adopted. [ 101 ] statistical analyses suggest that the english wikipedia committee ignores the content of disputes and rather focuses on the way disputes are conducted, [ 102 ] functioning not so much to resolve disputes and make peace between conflicting editors, but to weed out problematic editors while allowing potentially productive editors back in to participate. [ 101 ] therefore, the committee does not dictate the content of articles, although it sometimes condemns content changes when it deems the new content violates wikipedia policies (for example, if the new content is considered biased). [ e ] commonly used solutions include cautions and probations (used in 63% of cases) and banning editors from articles (43%), subject matters (23%), or wikipedia (16%). [ 101 ] complete bans from wikipedia are generally limited to instances of impersonation and antisocial behavior . [ w 39 ] when conduct is not impersonation or anti-social, but rather edit warring and other violations of editing policies, solutions tend to be limited to warnings. [ 101 ] each article and each user of wikipedia has an associated and dedicated "talk" page. these form the primary communication channel for editors to discuss, coordinate and debate. [ 103 ] wikipedia's community has been described as cultlike , [ 104 ] although not always with entirely negative connotations. [ 105 ] its preference for cohesiveness, even if it requires compromise that includes disregard of credentials , has been referred to as " anti-elitism ". [ w 40 ] wikipedia does not require that its editors and contributors provide identification. [ 106 ] as wikipedia grew, "who writes wikipedia?" became one of the questions frequently asked there. [ 107 ] jimmy wales once argued that only "a community ... a dedicated group of a few hundred volunteers" makes the bulk of contributions to wikipedia and that the project is therefore "much like any traditional organization". [ 108 ] in 2008, a slate magazine article reported that: "according to researchers in palo alto , one percent of wikipedia users are responsible for about half of the site's edits." [ 109 ] this method of evaluating contributions was later disputed by aaron swartz , who noted that several articles he sampled had large portions of their content (measured by number of characters) contributed by users with low edit counts. [ 110 ] the english wikipedia has 6,985,364 articles, 49,034,786 registered editors, and 118,341 active editors. an editor is considered active if they have made one or more edits in the past 30 days. [ w 41 ] editors who fail to comply with wikipedia cultural rituals, such as signing talk page comments, may implicitly signal that they are wikipedia outsiders, increasing the odds that wikipedia insiders may target or discount their contributions. becoming a wikipedia insider involves non-trivial costs: the contributor is expected to learn wikipedia-specific technological codes, submit to a sometimes convoluted dispute resolution process, and learn a "baffling culture rich with in-jokes and insider references". [ 111 ] editors who do not log in are in some sense " second-class citizens " on wikipedia, [ 111 ] as "participants are accredited by members of the wiki community, who have a vested interest in preserving the quality of the work product, on the basis of their ongoing participation", [ 112 ] but the contribution histories of anonymous unregistered editors recognized only by their ip addresses cannot be attributed to a particular editor with certainty. [ 112 ] a 2007 study by researchers from dartmouth college found that "anonymous and infrequent contributors to wikipedia ... are as reliable a source of knowledge as those contributors who register with the site". [ 113 ] jimmy wales stated in 2009 that "[i]t turns out over 50% of all the edits are done by just 0.7% of the users ... 524 people ... and in fact, the most active 2%, which is 1400 people, have done 73.4% of all the edits." [ 108 ] however, business insider editor and journalist henry blodget showed in 2009 that in a random sample of articles, most wikipedia content (measured by the amount of contributed text that survives to the latest sampled edit) is created by "outsiders", while most editing and formatting is done by "insiders". [ 108 ] a 2008 study found that wikipedians were less agreeable, open, and conscientious than others, [ 114 ] although a later commentary pointed out serious flaws, including that the data showed higher openness and that the differences with the control group and the samples were small. [ 115 ] according to a 2009 study, there is "evidence of growing resistance from the wikipedia community to new content". [ 116 ] several studies have shown that most volunteer wikipedia contributors are male. notably, the results of a wikimedia foundation survey in 2008 showed that only 13 percent of wikipedia editors were female. [ 117 ] because of this, universities throughout the united states tried to encourage women to become wikipedia contributors. [ 118 ] similarly, many of these universities, including yale and brown , gave college credit to students who create or edit an article relating to women in science or technology. [ 118 ] andrew lih , a professor and scientist, said that the reason he thought the number of male contributors outnumbered the number of females so greatly was because identifying as a woman may expose oneself to "ugly, intimidating behavior". [ 119 ] data has shown that africans are underrepresented among wikipedia editors. [ 120 ] there are currently 341 language editions of wikipedia (also called language versions , or simply wikipedias ). as of april 2025, the six largest, in order of article count, are the english , cebuano , german , french , swedish , and dutch wikipedias. [ w 43 ] the second and fifth-largest wikipedias owe their position to the article-creating bot lsjbot , which as of 2013 [update] had created about half the articles on the swedish wikipedia , and most of the articles in the cebuano and waray wikipedias . the latter are both languages of the philippines . in addition to the top six, twelve other wikipedias have more than a million articles each ( russian , spanish , italian , polish , egyptian arabic , chinese , japanese , ukrainian , vietnamese , waray , arabic , and portuguese ), seven more have over 500,000 articles ( persian , catalan , indonesian , serbian , korean , norwegian , and turkish ), 44 more have over 100,000, and 82 more have over 10,000. [ w 44 ] [ w 43 ] the largest, the english wikipedia, has over 6.9 million articles. as of january 2021, [update] the english wikipedia receives 48% of wikipedia's cumulative traffic, with the remaining split among the other languages. the top 10 editions represent approximately 85% of the total traffic. [ w 45 ] since wikipedia is based on the web and therefore worldwide, contributors to the same language edition may use different dialects or may come from different countries (as is the case for the english edition). these differences may lead to some conflicts over spelling differences (e.g. colour versus color ) [ w 46 ] or points of view. [ w 47 ] though the various language editions are held to global policies such as "neutral point of view", they diverge on some points of policy and practice, most notably on whether images that are not licensed freely may be used under a claim of fair use . [ w 48 ] [ 122 ] jimmy wales has described wikipedia as "an effort to create and distribute a free encyclopedia of the highest possible quality to every single person on the planet in their own language". [ w 49 ] though each language edition functions more or less independently, some efforts are made to supervise them all. they are coordinated in part by meta-wiki, the wikimedia foundation's wiki devoted to maintaining all its projects (wikipedia and others). [ w 50 ] for instance, meta-wiki provides important statistics on all language editions of wikipedia, [ w 51 ] and it maintains a list of articles every wikipedia should have. [ w 52 ] the list concerns basic content by subject: biography, history, geography, society, culture, science, technology, and mathematics. [ w 52 ] it is not rare for articles strongly related to a particular language not to have counterparts in another edition. for example, articles about small towns in the united states might be available only in english, even when they meet the notability criteria of other language wikipedia projects. [ w 32 ] translated articles represent only a small portion of articles in most editions, in part because those editions do not allow fully automated translation of articles. articles available in more than one language may offer "interwiki links", which link to the counterpart articles in other editions. [ 124 ] [ w 53 ] a study published by plos one in 2012 also estimated the share of contributions to different editions of wikipedia from different regions of the world. it reported that the proportion of the edits made from north america was 51% for the english wikipedia, and 25% for the simple english wikipedia . [ 123 ] on march 1, 2014, the economist , in an article titled "the future of wikipedia", cited a trend analysis concerning data published by the wikimedia foundation stating that "the number of editors for the english-language version has fallen by a third in seven years." [ 125 ] the attrition rate for active editors in english wikipedia was cited by the economist as substantially in contrast to statistics for wikipedia in other languages (non-english wikipedia). the economist reported that the number of contributors with an average of five or more edits per month was relatively constant since 2008 for wikipedia in other languages at approximately 42,000 editors within narrow seasonal variances of about 2,000 editors up or down. the number of active editors in english wikipedia, by sharp comparison, was cited as peaking in 2007 at approximately 50,000 and dropping to 30,000 by the start of 2014. [ 125 ] in contrast, the trend analysis for wikipedia in other languages (non-english wikipedia) shows success in retaining active editors on a renewable and sustained basis, with their numbers remaining relatively constant at approximately 42,000. no comment was made concerning which of the differentiated edit policy standards from wikipedia in other languages (non-english wikipedia) would provide a possible alternative to english wikipedia for effectively improving substantial editor attrition rates on the english-language wikipedia. [ 125 ] various wikipedians have criticized wikipedia's large and growing regulation , which includes more than fifty policies and nearly 150,000 words as of 2014. [update] [ 126 ] [ 100 ] critics have stated that wikipedia exhibits systemic bias . in 2010, columnist and journalist edwin black described wikipedia as being a mixture of "truth, half-truth, and some falsehoods". [ 127 ] articles in the chronicle of higher education and the journal of academic librarianship have criticized wikipedia's " undue-weight policy ", concluding that wikipedia explicitly is not designed to provide correct information about a subject, but rather focus on all the major viewpoints on the subject, give less attention to minor ones, and creates omissions that can lead to false beliefs based on incomplete information. [ 128 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] journalists oliver kamm and edwin black alleged (in 2010 and 2011 respectively) that articles are dominated by the loudest and most persistent voices, usually by a group with an "ax to grind" on the topic. [ 127 ] [ 131 ] a 2008 article in education next journal concluded that as a resource about controversial topics, wikipedia is subject to manipulation and spin . [ 132 ] in 2020, omer benjakob and stephen harrison noted that "media coverage of wikipedia has radically shifted over the past two decades: once cast as an intellectual frivolity, it is now lauded as the 'last bastion of shared reality' online." [ 133 ] multiple news networks and pundits have accused wikipedia of being ideologically biased . in february 2021, fox news accused wikipedia of whitewashing communism and socialism and having too much " leftist bias". [ 134 ] wikipedia co-founder sanger said that wikipedia has become a "propaganda" for the left-leaning "establishment" and warned the site can no longer be trusted. [ 135 ] in 2022, libertarian john stossel opined that wikipedia, a site he financially supported at one time, appeared to have gradually taken a significant turn in bias to the political left, specifically on political topics. [ 136 ] some studies suggest that wikipedia (and in particular the english wikipedia) has a "western cultural bias " (or "pro-western bias") [ 137 ] or "eurocentric bias", [ 138 ] reiterating, says anna samoilenko, "similar biases that are found in the 'ivory tower' of academic historiography". carwil bjork-james proposes that wikipedia could follow the diversification pattern of contemporary scholarship [ 139 ] and dangzhi zhao calls for a "decolonization" of wikipedia to reduce bias from opinionated white male editors. [ 140 ] articles for traditional encyclopedias such as encyclopædia britannica are written by experts , lending such encyclopedias a reputation for accuracy. [ 141 ] however, a peer review in 2005 of forty-two scientific entries on both wikipedia and encyclopædia britannica by the science journal nature found few differences in accuracy, and concluded that "the average science entry in wikipedia contained around four inaccuracies; britannica , about three." [ 142 ] joseph reagle suggested that while the study reflects "a topical strength of wikipedia contributors" in science articles, "wikipedia may not have fared so well using a random sampling of articles or on humanities subjects." [ 143 ] others raised similar critiques. [ 144 ] the findings by nature were disputed by encyclopædia britannica , [ 145 ] [ 146 ] and in response, nature gave a rebuttal of the points raised by britannica . [ 147 ] in addition to the point-for-point disagreement between these two parties, others have examined the sample size and selection method used in the nature effort, and suggested a "flawed study design" (in nature ' s manual selection of articles, in part or in whole, for comparison), absence of statistical analysis (e.g., of reported confidence intervals ), and a lack of study "statistical power" (i.e., owing to small sample size , 42 or 4 × 10 1 articles compared, vs >10 5 and >10 6 set sizes for britannica and the english wikipedia, respectively). [ 148 ] as a consequence of the open structure, wikipedia "makes no guarantee of validity" of its content, since no one is ultimately responsible for any claims appearing in it. [ w 54 ] concerns have been raised by pc world in 2009 regarding the lack of accountability that results from users' anonymity, the insertion of false information, [ 149 ] vandalism , and similar problems. legal research in a nutshell (2011), cites wikipedia as a "general source" that "can be a real boon" in "coming up to speed in the law governing a situation" and, "while not authoritative, can provide basic facts as well as leads to more in-depth resources". [ 150 ] economist tyler cowen wrote: "if i had to guess whether wikipedia or the median refereed journal article on economics was more likely to be true after a not so long think i would opt for wikipedia." he comments that some traditional sources of non-fiction suffer from systemic biases, and novel results, in his opinion, are over-reported in journal articles as well as relevant information being omitted from news reports. however, he also cautions that errors are frequently found on internet sites and that academics and experts must be vigilant in correcting them. [ 151 ] amy bruckman has argued that, due to the number of reviewers, "the content of a popular wikipedia page is actually the most reliable form of information ever created". [ 152 ] in september 2022, the sydney morning herald journalist liam mannix noted that: "there's no reason to expect wikipedia to be accurate ... and yet it [is]." mannix further discussed the multiple studies that have proved wikipedia to be generally as reliable as encyclopædia britannica , summarizing that "...turning our back on such an extraordinary resource is... well, a little petty." [ 153 ] critics argue that wikipedia's open nature and a lack of proper sources for most of the information makes it unreliable. [ 154 ] some commentators suggest that wikipedia may be reliable, but that the reliability of any given article is not clear. [ 155 ] editors of traditional reference works such as the encyclopædia britannica have questioned the project's utility and status as an encyclopedia. [ 156 ] wikipedia co-founder jimmy wales has claimed that wikipedia has largely avoided the problem of "fake news" because the wikipedia community regularly debates the quality of sources in articles. [ 157 ] wikipedia's open structure inherently makes it an easy target for internet trolls , spammers , and various forms of paid advocacy seen as counterproductive to the maintenance of a neutral and verifiable online encyclopedia. [ 67 ] [ w 55 ] in response to paid advocacy editing and undisclosed editing issues, wikipedia was reported in an article in the wall street journal to have strengthened its rules and laws against undisclosed editing. [ 159 ] the article stated that: "beginning monday [from the date of the article, june 16, 2014], changes in wikipedia's terms of use will require anyone paid to edit articles to disclose that arrangement. katherine maher , the nonprofit wikimedia foundation's chief communications officer, said the changes address a sentiment among volunteer editors that 'we're not an advertising service; we're an encyclopedia. ' " [ 159 ] [ 160 ] [ 161 ] [ 162 ] [ 163 ] these issues, among others, had been parodied since the first decade of wikipedia, notably by stephen colbert on the colbert report . [ 164 ] some university lecturers discourage students from citing any encyclopedia in academic work , preferring primary sources ; [ 165 ] some specifically prohibit wikipedia citations. [ 166 ] [ 167 ] wales stresses that encyclopedias of any type are not usually appropriate to use as citable sources, and should not be relied upon as authoritative. [ 168 ] wales once (2006 or earlier) said he receives about ten emails weekly from students saying they got failing grades on papers because they cited wikipedia; he told the students they got what they deserved. "for god's sake, you're in college; don't cite the encyclopedia", he said. [ 169 ] in february 2007, an article in the harvard crimson newspaper reported that a few of the professors at harvard university were including wikipedia articles in their syllabi , although without realizing the articles might change. [ 170 ] in june 2007, michael gorman , former president of the american library association , condemned wikipedia, along with google, stating that academics who endorse the use of wikipedia are "the intellectual equivalent of a dietitian who recommends a steady diet of big macs with everything". [ 171 ] a 2020 research study published in studies in higher education argued that wikipedia could be applied in the higher education " flipped classroom ", an educational model where students learn before coming to class and apply it in classroom activities. the experimental group was instructed to learn before class and get immediate feedback before going in (the flipped classroom model), while the control group was given direct instructions in class (the conventional classroom model). the groups were then instructed to collaboratively develop wikipedia entries, which would be graded in quality after the study. the results showed that the experimental group yielded more wikipedia entries and received higher grades in quality. the study concluded that learning with wikipedia in flipped classrooms was more effective than in conventional classrooms, demonstrating wikipedia could be used as an educational tool in higher education. [ 172 ] on march 5, 2014, julie beck writing for the atlantic magazine in an article titled "doctors' #1 source for healthcare information: wikipedia", stated that "fifty percent of physicians look up conditions on the (wikipedia) site, and some are editing articles themselves to improve the quality of available information." [ 173 ] beck continued to detail in this article new programs of amin azzam at the university of san francisco to offer medical school courses to medical students for learning to edit and improve wikipedia articles on health-related issues , as well as internal quality control programs within wikipedia organized by james heilman to improve a group of 200 health-related articles of central medical importance up to wikipedia's highest standard of articles using its featured article and good article peer-review evaluation process. [ 173 ] in a may 7, 2014, follow-up article in the atlantic titled "can wikipedia ever be a definitive medical text?", julie beck quotes wikiproject medicine's james heilman as stating: "just because a reference is peer-reviewed doesn't mean it's a high-quality reference." [ 174 ] beck added that: "wikipedia has its own peer review process before articles can be classified as 'good' or 'featured'. heilman, who has participated in that process before, says 'less than one percent' of wikipedia's medical articles have passed." [ 174 ] wikipedia seeks to create a summary of all human knowledge in the form of an online encyclopedia, with each topic covered encyclopedically in one article. since it has terabytes of disk space , it can have far more topics than can be covered by any printed encyclopedia. [ w 56 ] the exact degree and manner of coverage on wikipedia is under constant review by its editors, and disagreements are not uncommon (see deletionism and inclusionism ). [ 175 ] [ 176 ] wikipedia contains materials that some people may find objectionable, offensive, or pornographic. [ w 57 ] the "wikipedia is not censored" policy has sometimes proved controversial: in 2008, wikipedia rejected an online petition against the inclusion of images of muhammad in the english edition of its muhammad article, citing this policy. [ 177 ] the presence of politically, religiously, and pornographically sensitive materials in wikipedia has led to the censorship of wikipedia by national authorities in china [ 178 ] and pakistan, [ 179 ] among other countries. [ 180 ] [ 181 ] [ 182 ] through its "wikipedia loves libraries" program, wikipedia has partnered with major public libraries such as the new york public library for the performing arts to expand its coverage of underrepresented subjects and articles. [ 183 ] a 2011 study conducted by researchers at the university of minnesota indicated that male and female editors focus on different coverage topics. there was a greater concentration of females in the "people and arts" category, while males focus more on "geography and science". [ 184 ] research conducted by mark graham of the oxford internet institute in 2009 indicated that the geographic distribution of article topics is highly uneven, africa being the most underrepresented. [ 185 ] across 30 language editions of wikipedia, historical articles and sections are generally eurocentric and focused on recent events. [ 186 ] an editorial in the guardian in 2014 claimed that more effort went into providing references for a list of female porn actors than a list of women writers . [ 187 ] data has also shown that africa-related material often faces omission; a knowledge gap that a july 2018 wikimedia conference in cape town sought to address. [ 120 ] academic studies of wikipedia have consistently shown that wikipedia systematically over-represents a point of view (pov) belonging to a particular demographic described as the "average wikipedian", who is an educated, technically inclined, english-speaking white male, aged 15–49, from a developed christian country [ example needed ] in the northern hemisphere. [ 188 ] this pov is over-represented in relation to all existing povs. [ 189 ] [ 190 ] this systemic bias in editor demographic results in cultural bias , gender bias , and geographical bias on wikipedia . [ 191 ] [ 192 ] there are two broad types of bias, which are implicit (when a topic is omitted) and explicit (when a certain pov is over-represented in an article or by references). [ 189 ] interdisciplinary scholarly assessments of wikipedia articles have found that while articles are typically accurate and free of misinformation, they are also typically incomplete and fail to present all perspectives with a neutral point of view . [ 191 ] in 2011, wales claimed that the unevenness of coverage is a reflection of the demography of the editors, citing for example "biographies of famous women through history and issues surrounding early childcare". [ 34 ] the october 22, 2013, essay by tom simonite in mit's technology review titled "the decline of wikipedia" discussed the effect of systemic bias and policy creep on the downward trend in the number of editors . [ 35 ] wikipedia has been criticized for allowing information about graphic content. [ 193 ] articles depicting what some critics have called objectionable content (such as feces , cadaver , human penis , vulva , and nudity) contain graphic pictures and detailed information easily available to anyone with access to the internet, including children. [ w 58 ] the site also includes sexual content such as images and videos of masturbation and ejaculation , illustrations of zoophilia , and photos from hardcore pornographic films in its articles. it also has non-sexual photographs of nude children . [ w 59 ] the wikipedia article about virgin killer —a 1976 album from the german rock band scorpions —features a picture of the album's original cover, which depicts a naked prepubescent girl. the original release cover caused controversy and was replaced in some countries. in december 2008, access to the wikipedia article virgin killer was blocked for four days by most internet service providers in the united kingdom after the internet watch foundation (iwf) decided the album cover was a potentially illegal indecent image and added the article's url to a "blacklist" it supplies to british internet service providers. [ 194 ] in april 2010, sanger wrote a letter to the federal bureau of investigation, outlining his concerns that two categories of images on wikimedia commons contained child pornography, and were in violation of us federal obscenity law . [ 195 ] [ 196 ] sanger later clarified that the images, which were related to pedophilia and one about lolicon , were not of real children, but said that they constituted "obscene visual representations of the sexual abuse of children", under the protect act of 2003 . [ 197 ] that law bans photographic child pornography and cartoon images and drawings of children that are obscene under american law . [ 197 ] sanger also expressed concerns about access to the images on wikipedia in schools. [ 198 ] wikimedia foundation spokesman jay walsh strongly rejected sanger's accusation, [ 199 ] saying that wikipedia did not have "material we would deem to be illegal. if we did, we would remove it." [ 199 ] following the complaint by sanger, wales deleted sexual images without consulting the community. after some editors who volunteered to maintain the site argued that the decision to delete had been made hastily, wales voluntarily gave up some of the powers he had held up to that time as part of his co-founder status. he wrote in a message to the wikimedia foundation mailing-list that this action was "in the interest of encouraging this discussion to be about real philosophical/content issues, rather than be about me and how quickly i acted". [ 200 ] critics, including wikipediocracy , noticed that many of the pornographic images deleted from wikipedia since 2010 have reappeared. [ 201 ] one privacy concern in the case of wikipedia regards one's right to remain a private citizen rather than a public figure in the eyes of the law. [ 202 ] [ f ] it is a battle between the right to be anonymous in cyberspace and the right to be anonymous in real life . the wikimedia foundation's privacy policy states, "we believe that you shouldn't have to provide personal information to participate in the free knowledge movement", and states that "personal information" may be shared "for legal reasons", "to protect you, ourselves & others", or "to understand & experiment". [ w 60 ] in january 2006, a german court ordered the german wikipedia shut down within germany because it stated the full name of boris floricic , aka "tron", a deceased hacker. on february 9, 2006, the injunction against wikimedia deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that tron's right to privacy or that of his parents was being violated. [ 203 ] wikipedia has a " volunteer response team " that uses znuny, a free and open-source software fork of otrs [ w 61 ] to handle queries without having to reveal the identities of the involved parties. this is used, for example, in confirming the permission for using individual images and other media in the project. [ w 62 ] in late april 2023, wikimedia foundation announced that wikipedia will not submit to any age verifications that may be required by the uk's online safety bill legislation. rebecca mackinnon of the wikimedia foundation said that such checks would run counter to the website's commitment to minimal data collection on its contributors and readers. [ 204 ] wikipedia was described in 2015 as harboring a battleground culture of sexism and harassment . [ 205 ] [ 206 ] the perceived tolerance of abusive language was a reason put forth in 2013 for the gender gap in wikipedia editorship. [ 207 ] edit-a-thons have been held to encourage female editors and increase the coverage of women's topics. [ 208 ] in may 2018, a wikipedia editor rejected a submitted article about donna strickland due to lack of coverage in the media. [ w 63 ] [ 209 ] five months later, strickland won a nobel prize in physics "for groundbreaking inventions in the field of laser physics", becoming the third woman to ever receive the award. [ 209 ] [ 210 ] prior to winning the award, strickland's only mention on wikipedia was in the article about her collaborator and co-winner of the award gérard mourou . [ 209 ] her exclusion from wikipedia led to accusations of sexism, but corinne purtill writing for quartz argued that "it's also a pointed lesson in the hazards of gender bias in media, and of the broader consequences of underrepresentation." [ 211 ] purtill attributes the issue to the gender bias in media coverage. [ 211 ] a comprehensive 2008 survey, published in 2016, by julia b. bear of stony brook university 's college of business and benjamin collier of carnegie mellon university found significant gender differences in confidence in expertise, discomfort with editing, and response to critical feedback. "women reported less confidence in their expertise, expressed greater discomfort with editing (which typically involves conflict), and reported more negative responses to critical feedback compared to men." [ 212 ] wikipedia is hosted and funded by the wikimedia foundation , a non-profit organization which also operates wikipedia-related projects such as wiktionary and wikibooks . [ w 64 ] the foundation relies on public contributions and grants to fund its mission. [ 213 ] [ w 65 ] the foundation's 2020 internal revenue service form 990 shows revenue of $124.6 million and expenses of almost $112.2 million, with assets of about $191.2 million and liabilities of almost $11 million. [ w 66 ] in may 2014, wikimedia foundation named lila tretikov as its second executive director, taking over for sue gardner. [ w 67 ] the wall street journal reported on may 1, 2014, that tretikov's information technology background, from her years at university of california offers wikipedia an opportunity to develop in more concentrated directions guided by her often repeated position statement that, "information, like air, wants to be free." [ 214 ] [ 215 ] the same wall street journal article reported these directions of development according to an interview with spokesman jay walsh of wikimedia, who "said tretikov would address that issue ( paid advocacy ) as a priority. 'we are really pushing toward more transparency ... we are reinforcing that paid advocacy is not welcome.' initiatives to involve greater diversity of contributors, better mobile support of wikipedia, new geo-location tools to find local content more easily, and more tools for users in the second and third world are also priorities", walsh said. [ 214 ] following the departure of tretikov from wikipedia due to issues concerning the use of the "superprotection" feature which some language versions of wikipedia have adopted, [ w 68 ] katherine maher became the third executive director of the wikimedia foundation in june 2016. [ w 69 ] maher stated that one of her priorities would be the issue of editor harassment endemic to wikipedia as identified by the wikipedia board in december. she said to bloomberg businessweek regarding the harassment issue that: "it establishes a sense within the community that this is a priority ... [and that correction requires that] it has to be more than words." [ 119 ] maher served as executive director until april 2021. [ 216 ] maryana iskander was named the incoming ceo in september 2021, and took over that role in january 2022. she stated that one of her focuses would be increasing diversity in the wikimedia community. [ 217 ] wikipedia is also supported by many organizations and groups that are affiliated with the wikimedia foundation but independently-run, called wikimedia movement affiliates . these include wikimedia chapters (which are national or sub-national organizations, such as wikimedia deutschland and wikimedia france), thematic organizations (such as amical wikimedia for the catalan language community), and user groups. these affiliates participate in the promotion, development, and funding of wikipedia. [ w 70 ] the operation of wikipedia depends on mediawiki , a custom-made, free and open source wiki software platform written in php and built upon the mysql database system. [ w 71 ] the software incorporates programming features such as a macro language , variables , a transclusion system for templates , and url redirection . [ w 72 ] mediawiki is licensed under the gnu general public license (gpl) and it is used by all wikimedia projects, as well as many other wiki projects. [ w 71 ] [ w 73 ] originally, wikipedia ran on usemodwiki written in perl by clifford adams (phase i), which initially required camelcase for article hyperlinks; the present double bracket style was incorporated later. [ w 74 ] starting in january 2002 (phase ii), wikipedia began running on a php wiki engine with a mysql database; this software was custom-made for wikipedia by magnus manske . the phase ii software was repeatedly modified to accommodate the exponentially increasing demand. in july 2002 (phase iii), wikipedia shifted to the third-generation software, mediawiki, originally written by lee daniel crocker . several mediawiki extensions are installed to extend the functionality of the mediawiki software. [ w 75 ] in april 2005, a lucene extension [ w 76 ] [ w 77 ] was added to mediawiki's built-in search and wikipedia switched from mysql to lucene for searching. lucene was later replaced by cirrussearch which is based on elasticsearch . [ w 78 ] in july 2013, after extensive beta testing, a wysiwyg (what you see is what you get) extension, visualeditor , was opened to public use. [ 218 ] [ 219 ] [ 220 ] it was met with much rejection and criticism, and was described as "slow and buggy". [ 221 ] the feature was changed from opt-out to opt-in afterward. [ w 79 ] computer programs called bots have often been used to perform simple and repetitive tasks, such as correcting common misspellings and stylistic issues, or to start articles such as geography entries in a standard format from statistical data. [ w 80 ] [ 222 ] [ 223 ] one controversial contributor, sverker johansson , created articles with his bot lsjbot , which was reported to create up to 10,000 articles on the swedish wikipedia on certain days. [ 224 ] additionally, there are bots designed to automatically notify editors when they make common editing errors (such as unmatched quotes or unmatched parentheses). [ w 81 ] edits falsely identified by bots as the work of a banned editor can be restored by other editors. an anti-vandal bot is programmed to detect and revert vandalism quickly. [ 222 ] bots are able to indicate edits from particular accounts or ip address ranges, as occurred at the time of the shooting down of the mh17 jet in july 2014 when it was reported that edits were made via ips controlled by the russian government. [ 225 ] bots on wikipedia must be approved before activation. [ w 82 ] according to andrew lih , the current expansion of wikipedia to millions of articles would be difficult to envision without the use of such bots. [ 226 ] as of 2021, [update] page requests are first passed to a front-end layer of varnish caching servers and back-end layer caching is done by apache traffic server . [ w 83 ] requests that cannot be served from the varnish cache are sent to load-balancing servers running the linux virtual server software, which in turn pass them to one of the apache web servers for page rendering from the database. [ w 83 ] the web servers deliver pages as requested, performing page rendering for all the language editions of wikipedia. to increase speed further, rendered pages are cached in a distributed memory cache until invalidated, allowing page rendering to be skipped entirely for most common page accesses. [ 227 ] wikipedia currently runs on dedicated clusters of linux servers running the debian operating system. [ w 84 ] by january 22, 2013, wikipedia had migrated its primary data center to an equinix facility in ashburn, virginia . [ w 85 ] [ 228 ] in 2017, wikipedia installed a caching cluster in an equinix facility in singapore , the first of its kind in asia. [ w 86 ] in 2022, a caching data center was opened in marseille , france. [ w 87 ] in 2024, a caching data center was opened in são paulo , the first of its kind in south america. [ w 88 ] as of november 2024, [update] caching clusters are located in amsterdam , san francisco, singapore, marseille, and são paulo. [ w 25 ] [ w 89 ] following growing amounts of incoming donations in 2013 exceeding seven digits, [ 35 ] the foundation has reached a threshold of assets which qualify its consideration under the principles of industrial organization economics to indicate the need for the re-investment of donations into the internal research and development of the foundation. [ 229 ] two projects of such internal research and development have been the creation of a visual editor and the "thank" tab in the edit history, which were developed to improve issues of editor attrition. [ 35 ] [ 221 ] the estimates for reinvestment by industrial organizations into internal research and development was studied by adam jaffe , who recorded that the range of 4% to 25% annually was to be recommended, with high-end technology requiring the higher level of support for internal reinvestment. [ 230 ] at the 2013 level of contributions for wikimedia presently documented as 45 million dollars, [ w 90 ] the computed budget level recommended by jaffe for reinvestment into internal research and development is between 1.8 million and 11.3 million dollars annually. [ 230 ] in 2019, the level of contributions were reported by the wikimedia foundation as being at $120 million annually, [ w 91 ] updating the jaffe estimates for the higher level of support to between $3.08 million and $19.2 million annually. [ 230 ] multiple wikimedia projects have internal news publications. wikimedia 's online newspaper the signpost was founded in 2005 by michael snow, a wikipedia administrator who would join the wikimedia foundation's board of trustees in 2008. [ 231 ] [ 232 ] the publication covers news and events from the english wikipedia, the wikimedia foundation, and wikipedia's sister projects . [ w 92 ] the wikipedia library is a resource for wikipedia editors which provides free access to a wide range of digital publications , so that they can consult and cite these while editing the encyclopedia. [ 233 ] [ 234 ] over 60 publishers have partnered with the wikipedia library to provide access to their resources: when ice publishing joined in 2020, a spokesman said "by enabling free access to our content for wikipedia editors, we hope to further the research community's resources – creating and updating wikipedia entries on civil engineering which are read by thousands of monthly readers." [ 235 ] when the project was started in 2001, all text in wikipedia was covered by the gnu free documentation license (gfdl), a copyleft license permitting the redistribution, creation of derivative works, and commercial use of content while authors retain copyright of their work. [ w 24 ] the gfdl was created for software manuals that come with free software programs licensed under the gpl . this made it a poor choice for a general reference work: for example, the gfdl requires the reprints of materials from wikipedia to come with a full copy of the gfdl text. [ 236 ] in december 2002, the creative commons license was released; it was specifically designed for creative works in general, not just for software manuals. the wikipedia project sought the switch to the creative commons. [ w 93 ] because the gfdl and creative commons were incompatible, in november 2008, following the request of the project, the free software foundation (fsf) released a new version of the gfdl designed specifically to allow wikipedia to relicense its content to cc by-sa by august 1, 2009. [ w 94 ] in april 2009, wikipedia and its sister projects held a community-wide referendum which decided the switch in june 2009. [ w 95 ] [ w 96 ] [ w 97 ] [ w 98 ] the handling of media files (e.g. image files) varies across language editions. some language editions, such as the english wikipedia, include non-free image files under fair use doctrine, [ w 99 ] while the others have opted not to, in part because of the lack of fair use doctrines in their home countries (e.g. in japanese copyright law ). media files covered by free content licenses (e.g. creative commons ' cc by-sa ) are shared across language editions via wikimedia commons repository, a project operated by the wikimedia foundation. [ w 100 ] wikipedia's accommodation of varying international copyright laws regarding images has led some to observe that its photographic coverage of topics lags behind the quality of the encyclopedic text. [ 237 ] the wikimedia foundation is not a licensor of content on wikipedia or its related projects but merely a hosting service for contributors to and licensors of wikipedia, a position which was successfully defended in 2004 in a court in france. [ 238 ] [ 239 ] because wikipedia content is distributed under an open license, anyone can reuse or re-distribute it at no charge. [ w 101 ] the content of wikipedia has been published in many forms, both online and offline, outside the wikipedia website. thousands of " mirror sites " exist that republish content from wikipedia; two prominent ones that also include content from other reference sources are reference.com and answers.com . [ 240 ] [ 241 ] another example is wapedia , which began to display wikipedia content in a mobile-device-friendly format before wikipedia itself did. [ w 102 ] some web search engines make special use of wikipedia content when displaying search results: examples include microsoft bing (via technology gained from powerset ) [ 242 ] and duckduckgo . collections of wikipedia articles have been published on optical discs . an english version released in 2006 contained about 2,000 articles. [ w 103 ] the polish-language version from 2006 contains nearly 240,000 articles, [ w 104 ] the german-language version from 2007/2008 contains over 620,000 articles, [ w 105 ] and the spanish-language version from 2011 contains 886,000 articles. [ w 106 ] additionally, "wikipedia for schools", the wikipedia series of cds / dvds produced by wikipedia and sos children , is a free selection from wikipedia designed for education towards children eight to seventeen. [ w 107 ] there have been efforts to put a select subset of wikipedia's articles into printed book form. [ 243 ] [ w 108 ] since 2009, tens of thousands of print-on-demand books that reproduced english, german, russian, and french wikipedia articles have been produced by the american company books llc and by three mauritian subsidiaries of the german publisher vdm . [ 244 ] the website dbpedia , begun in 2007, extracts data from the infoboxes and category declarations of the english-language wikipedia. [ 245 ] wikimedia has created the wikidata project with a similar objective of storing the basic facts from each page of wikipedia and other wikimedia foundation projects and make it available in a queryable semantic format, rdf . [ w 109 ] as of february 2023, [update] it has over 101 million items. [ w 110 ] wikireader is a dedicated reader device that contains an offline copy of wikipedia, which was launched by openmoko and first released in 2009. [ w 111 ] obtaining the full contents of wikipedia for reuse presents challenges, since direct cloning via a web crawler is discouraged. [ w 112 ] wikipedia publishes " dumps " of its contents, but these are text-only; as of 2023, [update] there is no dump available of wikipedia's images. [ w 113 ] wikimedia enterprise is a for-profit solution to this. [ 246 ] several languages of wikipedia also maintain a reference desk, where volunteers answer questions from the general public. according to a study by pnina shachaf in the journal of documentation , the quality of the wikipedia reference desk is comparable to a standard library reference desk , with an accuracy of 55 percent. [ 247 ] wikipedia's original medium was for users to read and edit content using any standard web browser through a fixed internet connection . although wikipedia content has been accessible through the mobile web since july 2013, the new york times on february 9, 2014, quoted erik möller , deputy director of the wikimedia foundation, stating that the transition of internet traffic from desktops to mobile devices was significant and a cause for concern and worry. the article in the new york times reported the comparison statistics for mobile edits stating that, "only 20 percent of the readership of the english-language wikipedia comes via mobile devices, a figure substantially lower than the percentage of mobile traffic for other media sites, many of which approach 50 percent. and the shift to mobile editing has lagged even more." in 2014 the new york times reported that möller has assigned "a team of 10 software developers focused on mobile", out of a total of approximately 200 employees working at the wikimedia foundation. one principal concern cited by the new york times for the "worry" is for wikipedia to effectively address attrition issues with the number of editors which the online encyclopedia attracts to edit and maintain its content in a mobile access environment. [ 42 ] by 2023, the wikimedia foundation's staff had grown to over 700 employees. [ 2 ] access to wikipedia from mobile phones was possible as early as 2004, through the wireless application protocol (wap), via the wapedia service. [ w 102 ] in june 2007, wikipedia launched en.mobile.wikipedia.org, an official website for wireless devices. in 2009, a newer mobile service was officially released, located at en.m.wikipedia.org, which caters to more advanced mobile devices such as the iphone , android -based devices, or webos -based devices. [ w 114 ] several other methods of mobile access to wikipedia have emerged since. many devices and applications optimize or enhance the display of wikipedia content for mobile devices, while some also incorporate additional features such as use of wikipedia metadata like geoinformation . [ 248 ] [ 249 ] the android app for wikipedia was released in january 2012, to over 500,000 installs and generally positive reviews, scoring over four of a possible five in a poll of approximately 200,000 users downloading from google. [ w 115 ] [ w 116 ] the version for ios was released on april 3, 2013, to similar reviews. [ w 117 ] wikipedia zero was an initiative of the wikimedia foundation to expand the reach of the encyclopedia to the developing countries by partnering with mobile operators to allow free access. [ w 118 ] [ 250 ] it was discontinued in february 2018 due to lack of participation from mobile operators. [ w 118 ] andrew lih and andrew brown both maintain editing wikipedia with smartphones is difficult and this discourages new potential contributors. [ 251 ] [ 252 ] lih states that the number of wikipedia editors has been declining after several years, [ 251 ] and tom simonite of mit technology review claims the bureaucratic structure and rules are a factor in this. simonite alleges some wikipedians use the labyrinthine rules and guidelines to dominate others and those editors have a vested interest in keeping the status quo. [ 35 ] lih alleges there is a serious disagreement among existing contributors on how to resolve this. lih fears for wikipedia's long-term future while brown fears problems with wikipedia will remain and rival encyclopedias will not replace it. [ 251 ] [ 252 ] access to wikipedia has been blocked in mainland china since may 2015. [ 7 ] [ 253 ] [ 254 ] this was done after wikipedia started to use https encryption, which made selective censorship more difficult. [ 255 ] in 2017–18, after a barrage of false news reports, both facebook and youtube announced they would rely on wikipedia to help their users evaluate reports and reject false news. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] noam cohen , writing in the washington post states, "youtube's reliance on wikipedia to set the record straight builds on the thinking of another fact-challenged platform, the facebook social network, which announced last year that wikipedia would help its users root out ' fake news '." [ 13 ] [ 256 ] in february 2014, the new york times reported that wikipedia was ranked fifth globally among all websites, stating "with 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month, ... wikipedia trails just yahoo, facebook, microsoft and google, the largest with 1.2 billion unique visitors." [ 42 ] however, its ranking dropped to 13th globally by june 2020 due mostly to a rise in popularity of chinese websites for online shopping. [ 55 ] the website has since recovered its ranking as of april 2022. [ 55 ] in addition to logistic growth in the number of its articles, [ w 119 ] wikipedia has steadily gained status as a general reference website since its inception in 2001. [ 257 ] the number of readers of wikipedia worldwide reached 365 million at the end of 2009. [ w 120 ] the pew internet and american life project found that one third of us internet users consulted wikipedia. [ 258 ] in 2011, business insider gave wikipedia a valuation of $4 billion if it ran advertisements. [ 259 ] according to "wikipedia readership survey 2011", the average age of wikipedia readers is 36, with a rough parity between genders. almost half of wikipedia readers visit the site more than five times a month, and a similar number of readers specifically look for wikipedia in search engine results. about 47 percent of wikipedia readers do not realize that wikipedia is a non-profit organization. [ w 121 ] as of february 2023, [update] wikipedia attracts around 2 billion unique devices monthly, with the english wikipedia receiving 10 billion pageviews each month. [ w 1 ] during the covid-19 pandemic , wikipedia's coverage of the pandemic and fight against misinformation received international media attention, and brought an increase in wikipedia readership overall. [ 260 ] [ 261 ] [ 262 ] [ 263 ] noam cohen wrote in wired that wikipedia's effort to combat misinformation related to the pandemic was different from other major websites, opining, "unless twitter, facebook and the others can learn to address misinformation more effectively, wikipedia will remain the last best place on the internet." [ 261 ] in october 2020, the world health organization announced they were freely licensing its infographics and other materials on wikimedia projects. [ 264 ] there were nearly 7,000 covid-19 related wikipedia articles across 188 different wikipedias, as of november 2021. [update] [ 265 ] [ 266 ] wikipedia's content has also been used in academic studies, books, conferences, and court cases. [ w 122 ] [ 267 ] [ 268 ] the parliament of canada 's website refers to wikipedia's article on same-sex marriage in the "related links" section of its "further reading" list for the civil marriage act . [ 269 ] the encyclopedia's assertions are increasingly used as a source by organizations such as the us federal courts and the world intellectual property organization [ 270 ] —though mainly for supporting information rather than information decisive to a case. [ 271 ] content appearing on wikipedia has also been cited as a source and referenced in some us intelligence agency reports. [ 272 ] in december 2008, the scientific journal rna biology launched a new section for descriptions of families of rna molecules and requires authors who contribute to the section to also submit a draft article on the rna family for publication in wikipedia. [ 273 ] wikipedia has also been used as a source in journalism, [ 274 ] [ 275 ] often without attribution, and several reporters have been dismissed for plagiarizing from wikipedia . [ 276 ] [ 277 ] [ 278 ] [ 279 ] in 2006, time magazine recognized wikipedia's participation (along with youtube, reddit , myspace , and facebook) in the rapid growth of online collaboration and interaction by millions of people worldwide. [ 280 ] on september 16, 2007, the washington post reported that wikipedia had become a focal point in the 2008 us election campaign , saying: "type a candidate's name into google, and among the first results is a wikipedia page, making those entries arguably as important as any ad in defining a candidate. already, the presidential entries are being edited, dissected and debated countless times each day." [ 281 ] an october 2007 reuters article, titled "wikipedia page the latest status symbol", reported the recent phenomenon of how having a wikipedia article vindicates one's notability. [ 282 ] one of the first times wikipedia was involved in a governmental affair was on september 28, 2007, when italian politician franco grillini raised a parliamentary question with the minister of cultural resources and activities about the necessity of freedom of panorama . he said that the lack of such freedom forced wikipedia, "the seventh most consulted website", to forbid all images of modern italian buildings and art, and claimed this was hugely damaging to tourist revenues. [ 283 ] a working group led by peter stone (formed as a part of the stanford -based project one hundred year study on artificial intelligence ) in its report called wikipedia "the best-known example of crowdsourcing ... that far exceeds traditionally-compiled information sources, such as encyclopedias and dictionaries, in scale and depth". [ 284 ] [ 285 ] in a 2017 opinion piece for wired , hossein derakhshan describes wikipedia as "one of the last remaining pillars of the open and decentralized web " and contrasted its existence as a text-based source of knowledge with social media and social networking services , the latter having "since colonized the web for television's values". for derakhshan, wikipedia's goal as an encyclopedia represents the age of enlightenment tradition of rationality triumphing over emotions, a trend which he considers "endangered" due to the "gradual shift from a typographic culture to a photographic one, which in turn mean[s] a shift from rationality to emotions, exposition to entertainment". rather than " sapere aude " ( lit. ' dare to know ' ), social networks have led to a culture of "dare not to care to know". this is while wikipedia faces "a more concerning problem" than funding, namely "a flattening growth rate in the number of contributors to the website". consequently, the challenge for wikipedia and those who use it is to "save wikipedia and its promise of a free and open collection of all human knowledge amid the conquest of new and old television—how to collect and preserve knowledge when nobody cares to know." [ 286 ] wikipedia has won many awards, receiving its first two major awards in may 2004. [ w 123 ] the first was a golden nica for digital communities of the annual prix ars electronica contest; this came with a €10,000 (£6,588; $12,700) grant and an invitation to present at the pae cyberarts festival in austria later that year. the second was a judges' webby award for the "community" category. [ 287 ] in 2007, readers of brandchannel.com voted wikipedia as the fourth-highest brand ranking, receiving 15 percent of the votes in response to the question "which brand had the most impact on our lives in 2006?" [ 288 ] in september 2008, wikipedia received quadriga a mission of enlightenment award of werkstatt deutschland along with boris tadić , eckart höfling , and peter gabriel . the award was presented to wales by david weinberger . [ 289 ] in 2015, wikipedia was awarded both the annual erasmus prize , which recognizes exceptional contributions to culture, society or social sciences, [ 290 ] and the spanish princess of asturias award on international cooperation. [ 291 ] speaking at the asturian parliament in oviedo, the city that hosts the awards ceremony, jimmy wales praised the work of the asturian wikipedia users. [ 292 ] comedian stephen colbert has parodied or referenced wikipedia on numerous episodes of his show the colbert report and coined the related term wikiality , meaning "together we can create a reality that we all agree on—the reality we just agreed on". [ 164 ] another example can be found in "wikipedia celebrates 750 years of american independence", a july 2006 front-page article in the onion , [ 293 ] as well as the 2010 the onion article " 'l.a. law' wikipedia page viewed 874 times today". [ 294 ] in an april 2007 episode of the american television comedy the office , office manager ( michael scott ) is shown relying on a hypothetical wikipedia article for information on negotiation tactics to assist him in negotiating lesser pay for an employee. [ 295 ] viewers of the show tried to add the episode's mention of the page as a section of the actual wikipedia article on negotiation, but this effort was prevented by other users on the article's talk page. [ 296 ] " my number one doctor ", a 2007 episode of the television show scrubs , played on the perception that wikipedia is an unreliable reference tool with a scene in which perry cox reacts to a patient who says that a wikipedia article indicates that the raw food diet reverses the effects of bone cancer by retorting that the same editor who wrote that article also wrote the battlestar galactica episode guide . [ 297 ] in 2008, the comedy website collegehumor produced a video sketch named "professor wikipedia", in which the fictitious professor wikipedia instructs a class with a medley of unverifiable and occasionally absurd statements. [ 298 ] the dilbert comic strip from may 8, 2009, features a character supporting an improbable claim by saying "give me ten minutes and then check wikipedia." [ 299 ] in july 2009, bbc radio 4 broadcast a comedy series called bigipedia , which was set on a website which was a parody of wikipedia. [ 300 ] some of the sketches were directly inspired by wikipedia and its articles. [ 301 ] on august 23, 2013, the new yorker website published a cartoon with this caption: "dammit, manning, have you considered the pronoun war that this is going to start on your wikipedia page?" [ 302 ] the cartoon referred to chelsea elizabeth manning (born bradley edward manning), an american activist, politician, and former united states army soldier who had recently come out as a trans woman . [ 303 ] in june 2024, nature.com published a fictional wikipedia talk page under the title "plastic-eating fungus caused doomsday" by emma burnett. the talk page concerned a fictional article describing the unintended consequences of the release of a plastic-eating fungus to clean up an oil spill. the article contained talk page topics found on wikipedia, like discussions of changes in the articles priority level. [ 304 ] wikipedia has spawned several sister projects, which are also wikis run by the wikimedia foundation . these other wikimedia projects include wiktionary , a dictionary project launched in december 2002, [ w 124 ] wikiquote , a collection of quotations created a week after wikimedia launched, [ 305 ] wikibooks , a collection of collaboratively written free textbooks and annotated texts, [ w 125 ] wikimedia commons , a site devoted to free-knowledge multimedia, [ w 126 ] wikinews , for collaborative journalism, [ w 127 ] and wikiversity , a project for the creation of free learning materials and the provision of online learning activities. [ w 128 ] another sister project of wikipedia, wikispecies , is a catalog of all species, but is not open for public editing. [ 306 ] in 2012, wikivoyage , an editable travel guide, [ 307 ] and wikidata , an editable knowledge base, launched. [ w 129 ] the most obvious economic effect of wikipedia has been the death of commercial encyclopedias, especially printed versions like encyclopædia britannica , which were unable to compete with a product that is essentially free. [ 308 ] [ 309 ] [ 310 ] nicholas carr 's 2005 essay "the amorality of web 2.0 " criticizes websites with user-generated content (like wikipedia) for possibly leading to professional (and, in his view, superior) content producers' going out of business, because "free trumps quality all the time". carr wrote, "implicit in the ecstatic visions of web 2.0 is the hegemony of the amateur. i for one can't imagine anything more frightening." [ 311 ] others dispute the notion that wikipedia, or similar efforts, will entirely displace traditional publications. chris anderson , the former editor-in-chief of wired , wrote in nature that the " wisdom of crowds " approach of wikipedia will not displace top scientific journals with rigorous peer review processes. [ 312 ] wikipedia's influence on the biography publishing business has been a concern for some. book publishing data tracker nielsen bookscan stated in 2013 that biography sales were dropping "far more sharply". [ 313 ] kathryn hughes , professor of life writing at the university of east anglia and author of two biographies wrote, "the worry is that, if you can get all that information from wikipedia, what's left for biography?" [ 313 ] wikipedia has been widely used as a corpus for linguistic research in computational linguistics , information retrieval and natural language processing . [ 314 ] [ 315 ] in particular, it commonly serves as a target knowledge base for the entity linking problem, which is then called "wikification", [ 316 ] and to the related problem of word-sense disambiguation . [ 317 ] methods similar to wikification can in turn be used to find "missing" links in wikipedia. [ 318 ] in 2015, french researchers josé lages of the university of franche-comté in besançon and dima shepelyansky of paul sabatier university in toulouse published a global university ranking based on wikipedia scholarly citations. [ 319 ] [ 320 ] [ 321 ] they used pagerank , cheirank and similar algorithms "followed by the number of appearances in the 24 different language editions of wikipedia (descending order) and the century in which they were founded (ascending order)". [ 321 ] [ 322 ] the study was updated in 2019. [ 323 ] in december 2015, john julius norwich stated, in a letter published in the times newspaper, that as a historian he resorted to wikipedia "at least a dozen times a day", and had never yet caught it out. he described it as "a work of reference as useful as any in existence", with so wide a range that it is almost impossible to find a person, place, or thing that it has left uncovered and that he could never have written his last two books without it. [ 324 ] a 2017 mit study suggests that words used in wikipedia articles end up in scientific publications. [ 325 ] studies related to wikipedia have been using machine learning and artificial intelligence [ 285 ] to support various operations. one of the most important areas is the automatic detection of vandalism [ 326 ] [ 327 ] and data quality assessment in wikipedia. [ 328 ] [ 329 ] in february 2022, civil servants from the uk's housing, communities and local government committee were found to have used wikipedia for research after journalists at the independent noted that parts of the document had been lifted directly from wikipedia articles on constantinople and the list of largest cities throughout history . [ 330 ] several interactive multimedia encyclopedias incorporating entries written by the public existed long before wikipedia was founded. the first of these was the 1986 bbc domesday project , which included text (entered on bbc micro computers) and photographs from more than a million contributors in the uk, and covered the geography, art, and culture of the uk. this was the first interactive multimedia encyclopedia (and was also the first major multimedia document connected through internal links), with the majority of articles being accessible through an interactive map of the uk. the user interface and part of the content of the domesday project were emulated on a website until 2008. [ 331 ] several free-content, collaborative encyclopedias were created around the same period as wikipedia (e.g. everything2 ), [ 332 ] with many later being merged into the project (e.g. gne ). [ w 130 ] one of the most successful early online encyclopedias incorporating entries by the public was h2g2 , which was created by douglas adams in 1999. the h2g2 encyclopedia is relatively lighthearted, focusing on articles which are both witty and informative. [ 333 ] subsequent collaborative knowledge websites have drawn inspiration from wikipedia. others use more traditional peer review , such as encyclopedia of life and the online wiki encyclopedias scholarpedia and citizendium . [ 334 ] [ 335 ] the latter was started by sanger in an attempt to create a reliable alternative to wikipedia. [ 336 ] [ 337 ]

free content , libre content , libre information , or free information is any kind of creative work , such as a work of art , a book, a software program , or any other creative content for which there are very minimal copyright and other legal limitations on usage, modification and distribution. these are works or expressions which can be freely studied, applied, copied and modified by anyone for any purpose [ 1 ] [ better source needed ] including, in some cases, commercial purposes. free content encompasses all works in the public domain and also those copyrighted works whose licenses honor and uphold the definition of free cultural work. in most countries, the berne convention grants copyright holders control over their creations by default. therefore, copyrighted content must be explicitly declared free by the authors, which is usually accomplished by referencing or including licensing statements from within the work. the right to reuse such a work is granted by the authors in a license known as a free license , a free distribution license, or an open license, depending on the rights assigned. these freedoms given to users in the reuse of works (that is, the right to freely use, study, modify or distribute these works, possibly also for commercial purposes) are often associated with obligations (to cite the original author, to maintain the original license of the reused content) or restrictions (excluding commercial use, banning certain media) chosen by the author. [ citation needed ] there are a number of standardized licenses offering varied options that allow authors to choose the type of reuse of their work that they wish to authorize or forbid. there are a number of different definitions of free content in regular use. legally, however, free content is very similar to open content . an analogy is a use of the rival terms free software and open-source, which describe ideological differences rather than legal ones. [ 2 ] [ self-published source? ] the term open source, by contrast, sought to encompass them all in one movement. [ 3 ] [ 4 ] for instance, the open knowledge foundation 's open definition describes "open" as synonymous with the definition of free in the "definition of free cultural works" (as also in the open source definition and free software definition ). [ 5 ] for such free/open content both movements recommend the same three creative commons licenses , the cc by, cc by-sa, and cc0. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] copyright is a legal concept, which gives the author or creator of a work legal control over the duplication and public performance of their work. in many jurisdictions, this is limited by a time period after which the works then enter the public domain . copyright laws are a balance between the rights of creators of intellectual and artistic works and the rights of others to build upon those works. during the time period of copyright the author's work may only be copied, modified, or publicly performed with the consent of the author, unless the use is a fair use . traditional copyright control limits the use of the work of the author to those who either pay royalties to the author for usage of the author's content or limit their use to fair use. secondly, it limits the use of content whose author cannot be found. [ 10 ] finally, it creates a perceived barrier between authors by limiting derivative works, such as mashups and collaborative content. [ 11 ] although open content has been described as a counterbalance to copyright , open content licenses rely on a copyright holder's power to license their work, as copyleft which also utilizes copyright for such a purpose. [ 12 ] the public domain is a range of creative works whose copyright has expired or was never established, as well as ideas and facts [ note 1 ] which are ineligible for copyright. a public domain work is a work whose author has either relinquished to the public or no longer can claim control over, the distribution and usage of the work. as such, any person may manipulate, distribute, or otherwise use the work, without legal ramifications. a work in the public domain or released under a permissive license may be referred to as "copycenter". [ 13 ] copyleft is a play on the word copyright and describes the practice of using copyright law to remove restrictions on distributing copies and modified versions of a work. [ 14 ] the aim of copyleft is to use the legal framework of copyright to enable non-author parties to be able to reuse and, in many licensing schemes, modify content that is created by an author. unlike works in the public domain, the author still maintains copyright over the material, however, the author has granted a non-exclusive license to any person to distribute, and often modify, the work. copyleft licenses require that any derivative works be distributed under the same terms and that the original copyright notices be maintained. a symbol commonly associated with copyleft is a reversal of the copyright symbol , facing the other way; the opening of the c points left rather than right. unlike the copyright symbol, the copyleft symbol does not have a codified meaning. [ 15 ] projects that provide free content exist in several areas of interest, such as software, academic literature, general literature, music, images, video, and engineering . technology has reduced the cost of publication and reduced the entry barrier sufficiently to allow for the production of widely disseminated materials by individuals or small groups. projects to provide free literature and multimedia content have become increasingly prominent owing to the ease of dissemination of materials that are associated with the development of computer technology. such dissemination may have been too costly prior to these technological developments. in media, which includes textual, audio, and visual content, free licensing schemes such as some of the licenses made by creative commons have allowed for the dissemination of works under a clear set of legal permissions. not all creative commons licenses are entirely free; their permissions may range from very liberal general redistribution and modification of the work to a more restrictive redistribution-only licensing. since february 2008, creative commons licenses which are entirely free carry a badge indicating that they are "approved for free cultural works". [ 16 ] repositories exist which exclusively feature free material and provide content such as photographs, clip art , music, [ 17 ] and literature. [ 18 ] while extensive reuse of free content from one website in another website is legal, it is usually not sensible because of the duplicate content problem. wikipedia is amongst the most well-known databases of user-uploaded free content on the web. while the vast majority of content on wikipedia is free content, some copyrighted material is hosted under fair-use criteria . free and open-source software , which is often referred to as open source software and free software , is a maturing technology with companies using them to provide services and technology to both end-users and technical consumers. the ease of dissemination increases modularity, which allows for smaller groups to contribute to projects as well as simplifying collaboration. some claim that open source development models offer similar peer-recognition and collaborative benefit incentive as in more classical fields such as scientific research, with the social structures that result leading to decreased production costs. [ 19 ] given sufficient interest in a software component, by using peer-to-peer distribution methods, distribution costs may be reduced, easing the burden of infrastructure maintenance on developers. as distribution is simultaneously provided by consumers, these software distribution models are scalable; that is, the method is feasible regardless of the number of consumers. in some cases, free software vendors may use peer-to-peer technology as a method of dissemination. [ 20 ] project hosting and code distribution is not a problem for most free projects as a number of providers offer these services free of charge. free content principles have been translated into fields such as engineering, where designs and engineering knowledge can be readily shared and duplicated, in order to reduce overheads associated with project development. open design principles can be applied in engineering and technological applications, with projects in mobile telephony , small-scale manufacture, [ 21 ] the automotive industry, [ 22 ] [ 23 ] and even agricultural areas. technologies such as distributed manufacturing can allow computer-aided manufacturing and computer-aided design techniques to be able to develop small-scale production of components for the development of new, or repair of existing, devices. rapid fabrication technologies underpin these developments, which allow end-users of technology to be able to construct devices from pre-existing blueprints, using software and manufacturing hardware to convert information into physical objects. in academic work, the majority of works are not free, although the percentage of works that are open access is growing. open access refers to online research outputs that are free of all restrictions to access and free of many restrictions on use (e.g. certain copyright and license restrictions). [ 24 ] authors may see open access publishing as a way of expanding the audience that is able to access their work to allow for greater impact, or support it for ideological reasons. [ 25 ] [ 26 ] open access publishers such as plos and biomed central provide capacity for review and publishing of free works; such publications are currently more common in science than humanities. various funding institutions and governing research bodies have mandated that academics must produce their works to be open-access, in order to qualify for funding, such as the us national institutes of health , research councils uk (effective 2016) and the european union (effective 2020). [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] at an institutional level, some universities, such as the massachusetts institute of technology , have adopted open access publishing by default by introducing their own mandates. [ 30 ] some mandates may permit delayed publication and may charge researchers for open access publishing. [ 31 ] [ 32 ] for teaching purposes, some universities, including mit , provide freely available course content, such as lecture notes, video resources and tutorials. this content is distributed via internet to the general public. publication of such resources may be either by a formal institution-wide program, [ 33 ] or informally, by individual academics or departments. open content publication has been seen as a method of reducing costs associated with information retrieval in research, as universities typically pay to subscribe for access to content that is published through traditional means. [ 9 ] [ 34 ] subscriptions for non-free content journals may be expensive for universities to purchase, though the articles are written and peer-reviewed by academics themselves at no cost to the publisher. this has led to disputes between publishers and some universities over subscription costs, such as the one that occurred between the university of california and the nature publishing group . [ 35 ] [ 36 ] free and open content has been used to develop alternative routes towards higher education. open content is a free way of obtaining higher education that is "focused on collective knowledge and the sharing and reuse of learning and scholarly content." [ 37 ] there are multiple projects and organizations that promote learning through open content, including opencourseware and khan academy . some universities, like mit , yale , and tufts are making their courses freely available on the internet. [ 38 ] there are also a number of organizations promoting the creation of openly licensed textbooks such as the university of minnesota's open textbook library, connexions , openstax college , the saylor academy, open textbook challenge, and wikibooks . [ citation needed ] any country has its own law and legal system, sustained by its legislation, which consists of documents. in a democratic country , laws are published as open content, in principle free content; but in general, there are no explicit licenses attributed for the text of each law, so the license must be assumed as an implied license . only a few countries have explicit licenses in their law-documents, as the uk's open government licence (a cc by compatible license). in the other countries, the implied license comes from its proper rules (general laws and rules about copyright in government works). the automatic protection provided by the berne convention does not apply to the texts of laws: article 2.4 excludes the official texts from the automatic protection. it is also possible to "inherit" the license from context. the set of country's law-documents is made available through national repositories. examples of law-document open repositories: lexml brazil , legislation.gov.uk , and n-lex . in general, a law-document is offered in more than one (open) official version, but the main one is that published by a government gazette . so, law-documents can eventually inherit license expressed by the repository or by the gazette that contains it. the concept of applying free software licenses to content was introduced by michael stutz, who in 1997 wrote the paper "applying copyleft to non-software information" for the gnu project . [ 39 ] the term "open content" was coined by david a. wiley in 1998 and evangelized via the open content project , describing works licensed under the open content license (a non-free share-alike license, see 'free content' below) and other works licensed under similar terms. [ 40 ] the website of the open content project once defined open content as 'freely available for modification, use and redistribution under a license similar to those used by the open-source / free software community'. [ 40 ] however, such a definition would exclude the open content license because that license forbids charging for content; a right required by free and open-source software licenses. [ citation needed ] it has since come to describe a broader class of content without conventional copyright restrictions. the openness of content can be assessed under the '5rs framework' based on the extent to which it can be retained, reused, revised, remixed and redistributed by members of the public without violating copyright law. [ 41 ] unlike free content and content under open-source licenses , there is no clear threshold that a work must reach to qualify as 'open content'. the 5rs are put forward on the open content project website as a framework for assessing the extent to which content is open: this broader definition distinguishes open content from open-source software, since the latter must be available for commercial use by the public. however, it is similar to several definitions for open educational resources, which include resources under noncommercial and verbatim licenses. [ 42 ] [ 43 ] in 2003, david wiley announced that the open content project had been succeeded by creative commons and their licenses; wiley joined as "director of educational licenses". [ 44 ] [ 45 ] in 2005, the open icecat project was launched, in which product information for e-commerce applications was created and published under the open content license. it was embraced by the tech sector, which was already quite open source minded. in 2006, a creative commons' successor project, the definition of free cultural works , was introduced for free content. [ 46 ] it was put forth by erik möller , richard stallman , lawrence lessig , benjamin mako hill , angela beesley, and others. [ 47 ] the definition of free cultural works is used by the wikimedia foundation . [ 48 ] in 2009, the attribution and attribution-sharealike creative commons licenses were marked as "approved for free cultural works". [ 49 ] another successor project is the open knowledge foundation , founded by rufus pollock in cambridge , in 2004 [ 50 ] as a global non-profit network to promote and share open content and data. [ 51 ] in 2007 the okf gave an open knowledge definition for "content such as music, films, books; data be it scientific, historical, geographic or otherwise; government and other administrative information". [ 52 ] in october 2014 with version 2.0 open works and open licenses were defined and "open" is described as synonymous to the definitions of open/free in the open source definition, the free software definition, and the definition of free cultural works. [ 53 ] a distinct difference is the focus given to the public domain, open access , and readable open formats . okf recommends six conformant licenses: three of okn's (open data commons public domain dedication and licence, open data commons attribution license, open data commons open database license ) and the cc by , cc by-sa , and cc0 creative commons licenses. [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ]

an encyclopedia [ a ] is a reference work or compendium providing summaries of knowledge , either general or special, in a particular field or discipline. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] encyclopedias are divided into articles or entries that are arranged alphabetically by article name [ 3 ] or by thematic categories, or else are hyperlinked and searchable. [ 4 ] encyclopedia entries are longer and more detailed than those in most dictionaries . [ 3 ] [ 5 ] generally speaking, encyclopedia articles focus on factual information concerning the subject named in the article's title; [ 5 ] this is unlike dictionary entries, which focus on linguistic information about words , such as their etymology , meaning, pronunciation , use, and grammatical forms. [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] encyclopedias have existed for around 2,000 years and have evolved considerably during that time as regards language (written in a major international or a vernacular language), size (few or many volumes), intent (presentation of a global or a limited range of knowledge), cultural perspective (authoritative, ideological, didactic, utilitarian), authorship (qualifications, style), readership (education level, background, interests, capabilities), and the technologies available for their production and distribution (hand-written manuscripts, small or large print runs, internet). as a valued source of reliable information compiled by experts, printed versions found a prominent place in libraries , schools and other educational institutions. the appearance of digital and open-source versions in the 21st century, such as wikipedia (combining with the wiki website format), has vastly expanded the accessibility, authorship, readership, and variety of encyclopedia entries. [ 10 ] the word encyclopedia comes from the koine greek ἐγκύκλιος παιδεία , [ 11 ] transliterated enkúklios paideía ' general education ' , from enkúklios ( ἐγκύκλιος ) ' circular, recurrent, required regularly, general ' [ 5 ] [ 12 ] and paideía ( παιδεία ) ' education, rearing of a child ' ; together, the phrase literally translates as ' complete instruction, complete knowledge ' . [ 13 ] however, the two separate words were reduced to a single word due to a scribal error [ 14 ] by copyists of a latin manuscript edition of quintillian in 1470. [ 15 ] the copyists took this phrase to be a single greek word, enkuklopaideía , with the same meaning, and this spurious greek word became the neo-latin word encyclopaedia , which was in turn borrowed into english. because of this compounded word, readers since the fifteenth century have often, and incorrectly, thought that the roman authors quintillian and pliny described an ancient genre. [ 16 ] following noah webster 's spelling reform , [ 17 ] the spelling of the word varies between encyclopedia in american english, encyclopaedia in british english (although the spelling encyclopedia is increasingly gaining acceptance), and encyclopædia in certain specialized cases. [ 18 ] the modern encyclopedia evolved from the dictionary in the 18th century; this lineage can be seen in the alphabetical order of print encyclopedias. [ 19 ] historically, both encyclopedias and dictionaries have been compiled by well-educated, well-informed content experts , but they are significantly different in structure. a dictionary is a linguistic work that primarily focuses on an alphabetical listing of words and their definitions . synonymous words and those related by the subject matter are to be found scattered around the dictionary, giving no obvious place for in-depth treatment. thus, a dictionary typically provides limited information , analysis or background for the word defined. while it may offer a definition, it may leave the reader lacking in understanding the meaning, significance or limitations of a term , and how the term relates to a broader field of knowledge. to address those needs, an encyclopedia article is typically not limited to simple definitions, and is not limited to defining an individual word, but provides a more extensive meaning for a subject or discipline . in addition to defining and listing synonymous terms for the topic, the article can treat the topic's more extensive meaning in more depth and convey the most relevant accumulated knowledge on that subject. an encyclopedia article also often includes many maps and illustrations , as well as bibliography and statistics . [ 5 ] an encyclopedia is, theoretically, not written to convince, although one of its goals is indeed to convince its reader of its veracity. in addition, sometimes books or reading lists are compiled from a compendium of articles (either wholly or partially taken) from a specific encyclopedia. four major elements define an encyclopedia: its subject matter, its scope, its method of organization, and its method of production: some works entitled "dictionaries" are similar to encyclopedias, especially those concerned with a particular field (such as the dictionary of the middle ages , the dictionary of american naval fighting ships , and black's law dictionary ). the macquarie dictionary , australia's national dictionary, became an encyclopedic dictionary after its first edition in recognition of the use of proper nouns in common communication, and the words derived from such proper nouns. there are some broad differences between encyclopedias and dictionaries. most noticeably, encyclopedia articles are longer, fuller and more thorough than entries in most general-purpose dictionaries. [ 3 ] [ 20 ] there are differences in content as well. generally speaking, dictionaries provide linguistic information about words themselves, while encyclopedias focus more on the things for which those words stand. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] thus, while dictionary entries are inextricably fixed to the word described, encyclopedia articles can be given a different entry name. as such, dictionary entries are not fully translatable into other languages, but encyclopedia articles can be. [ 6 ] in practice, however, the distinction is not concrete, as there is no clear-cut difference between factual, "encyclopedic" information and linguistic information such as appear in dictionaries. [ 8 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] thus encyclopedias may contain material that is also found in dictionaries, and vice versa. [ 21 ] in particular, dictionary entries often contain factual information about the thing named by the word. [ 20 ] [ 21 ] the earliest encyclopedic work to have survived to modern times is the natural history of pliny the elder , a roman statesman living in the 1st century ad, [ 5 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] a work indebted to varro (1st century bce). [ 25 ] he compiled a work of 37 chapters covering natural history , architecture, medicine, geography , geology, and all aspects of the world around him. [ 24 ] this work became very popular in antiquity , was one of the first classical manuscripts to be printed in 1470, and has remained popular ever since as a source of information on the roman world, and especially roman art , roman technology and roman engineering . the spanish scholar isidore of seville was the first christian writer to try to compile a summa of universal knowledge, the etymologiae ( c. 600–625 ), also known by classicists as the origines (abbreviated orig .). this encyclopedia—the first such christian epitome —formed a huge compilation of 448 chapters in 20 books [ 26 ] based on hundreds of classical sources, including the naturalis historia . of the etymologiae in its time it was said quaecunque fere sciri debentur , "practically everything that it is necessary to know". [ 27 ] [ 23 ] among the areas covered were: grammar , rhetoric , mathematics , geometry , music , astronomy , medicine , law , the catholic church and heretical sects, pagan philosophers , languages , cities , animals and birds , the physical world , geography , public buildings , roads , metals , rocks , agriculture , ships , clothes , food , and tools . another christian encyclopedia was the institutiones divinarum et saecularium litterarum of cassiodorus (543–560) dedicated to the christian divinity and the seven liberal arts. [ 23 ] [ 5 ] the encyclopedia of suda , a massive 10th-century byzantine encyclopedia, had 30,000 entries (broadly alphabetically arranged), many drawing from ancient sources that have since been lost, and often derived from medieval christian compilers. [ 23 ] from india, the siribhoovalaya (kannada: ಸಿರಿಭೂವಲಯ), variously dated to c. 800 ad, the 15th century, or an even more recent time, is a work of kannada literature written by kumudendu muni , a jain monk. it is unique because rather than employing alphabets, it is composed entirely in kannada numerals . many philosophies which existed in the jain classics are eloquently and skillfully interpreted in the work. the 2nd century bc reference work shiben has been described as a chinese encyclopedia of genealogies, while the huanglan , completed in the 220s, was an early leishu encyclopedia. the yiwen leiju , completed in 624, was a landmark literature encyclopedia of the early tang dynasty . the enormous encyclopedic works of the four great books of song , compiled by the 11th century during the early song dynasty (960–1279), was a massive literary undertaking for the time. the last encyclopedia of the four, the prime tortoise of the record bureau , amounted to 9.4 million chinese characters in 1,000 written volumes. the yongle encyclopedia (completed 1408) comprised 11,095 volumes, making it the largest paper encyclopedia in world history. [ 28 ] [ 29 ] there were many great encyclopedists throughout chinese history, including the scientist and statesman shen kuo (1031–1095) with his dream pool essays of 1088; the statesman, inventor, and agronomist wang zhen (active 1290–1333) with his nong shu of 1313; and song yingxing (1587–1666) with his tiangong kaiwu . song yingxing was termed the " diderot of china" by british historian joseph needham . [ 30 ] before the advent of the printing press, encyclopedic works were all hand-copied and thus rarely available, beyond wealthy patrons or monastic men of learning: they were expensive, and usually written for those extending knowledge rather than those using it. the introduction of printing from asia allowed a wider diffusion of encyclopedias and every scholar could have his or her copy. nuremberg chronicle from 1493 is one of the best-documented early printed books—an incunabulum —and one of the first to successfully integrate illustrations and text. both latin and german editions were printed by anton koberger in nuremberg. [ 31 ] the de expetendis et fugiendis rebus by giorgio valla was posthumously printed in 1501 by aldo manuzio in venice . this work followed the traditional scheme of liberal arts. however, valla added the translation of ancient greek works on mathematics (firstly by archimedes ), newly discovered and translated. the margarita philosophica by gregor reisch , printed in 1503, was a complete encyclopedia explaining the seven liberal arts . financial, commercial, legal, and intellectual factors changed the size of encyclopedias. middle classes had more time to read and encyclopedias helped them to learn more. publishers wanted to increase their output so some countries like germany started selling books missing alphabetical sections, to publish faster. also, publishers could not afford all the resources by themselves, so multiple publishers would come together with their resources to create better encyclopedias. later, rivalry grew, causing copyright to occur due to weak underdeveloped laws. john harris is often credited with introducing the now-familiar alphabetic format in 1704 with his english lexicon technicum: or, a universal english dictionary of arts and sciences: explaining not only the terms of art, but the arts themselves – to give its full title. organized alphabetically, its content does indeed contain an explanation not merely of the terms used in the arts and sciences, but of the arts and sciences themselves. sir isaac newton contributed his only published work on chemistry to the second volume of 1710. indeed, the purpose of an encyclopedia is to collect knowledge disseminated around the globe; to set forth its general system to the men with whom we live, and transmit it to those who will come after us, so that the work of preceding centuries will not become useless to the centuries to come; and so that our offspring, becoming better instructed, will at the same time become more virtuous and happy, and that we should not die without having rendered a service to the human race in the future years to come. encyclopédie, ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers ( french for 'encyclopedia, or a systematic dictionary of the sciences, arts and crafts'), [ 33 ] better known as encyclopédie ( french: [ɑ̃siklɔpedi] ), was a general encyclopedia published in france between 1751 and 1772, with later supplements, revised editions, and translations. it had many writers, known as the encyclopédistes . it was edited by denis diderot and, until 1759, co-edited by jean le rond d'alembert . [ 34 ] the encyclopédie is most famous for representing the thought of the enlightenment . according to denis diderot in the article "encyclopédie", the encyclopédie 's aim was "to change the way people think" and for people to be able to inform themselves and to know things. [ 35 ] he and the other contributors advocated for the secularization of learning away from the jesuits . [ 36 ] diderot wanted to incorporate all of the world's knowledge into the encyclopédie and hoped that the text could disseminate all this information to the public and future generations. [ 37 ] thus, it is an example of democratization of knowledge . the encyclopædia britannica ( latin for 'british encyclopaedia') is a general-knowledge english-language encyclopaedia . it has been published by encyclopædia britannica, inc. since 1768, although the company has changed ownership seven times. the 2010 version of the 15th edition, which spans 32 volumes [ 40 ] and 32,640 pages, was the last printed edition. since 2016, it has been published exclusively as an online encyclopaedia . printed for 244 years, the britannica was the longest-running in-print encyclopaedia in the english language. it was first published between 1768 and 1771 in edinburgh , scotland, in three volumes. the encyclopaedia grew in size; the second edition was 10 volumes, [ 41 ] and by its fourth edition (1801–1810), it had expanded to 20 volumes. [ 42 ] its rising stature as a scholarly work helped recruit eminent contributors, and the 9th (1875–1889) and 11th editions (1911) are landmark encyclopaedias for scholarship and literary style. starting with the 11th edition and following its acquisition by an american firm, the britannica shortened and simplified articles to broaden its appeal to the north american market. in 1936, the britannica became the first encyclopaedia to adopt "continuous revision", in which the encyclopaedia is reprinted annually with articles updated on a schedule. [ 43 ] in the 21st century, the britannica suffered first from competition with the digital multimedia encyclopaedia microsoft encarta , [ 44 ] and later with the online peer-produced encyclopaedia wikipedia . [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] in march 2012, it announced it would no longer publish printed editions and would focus instead on the online version. [ 46 ] [ 48 ] the brockhaus enzyklopädie ( german for brockhaus encyclopedia ) is a german-language encyclopedia which until 2009 was published by the f. a. brockhaus printing house. the first edition originated in the conversations-lexikon published by renatus gotthelf löbel and franke in leipzig 1796–1808. renamed der große brockhaus in 1928 and brockhaus enzyklopädie from 1966, the current [update] 21st thirty-volume edition contains about 300,000 entries on about 24,000 pages, with about 40,000 maps, graphics and tables. it is the largest german-language printed encyclopedia in the 21st century. in the united states, the 1950s and 1960s saw the introduction of several large popular encyclopedias, often sold on installment plans. the best known of these were world book and funk and wagnalls . as many as 90% were sold door to door . [ 22 ] jack lynch says in his book you could look it up that encyclopedia salespeople were so common that they became the butt of jokes. he describes their sales pitch saying, "they were selling not books but a lifestyle, a future, a promise of social mobility." a 1961 world book ad said, "you are holding your family's future in your hands right now," while showing a feminine hand holding an order form. [ 49 ] as of the 1990s, two of the most prominent encyclopedias published in the united states were collier's encyclopedia and encyclopedia americana . [ 50 ] by the late 20th century, encyclopedias were being published on cd-roms for use with personal computers . this was the usual way computer users accessed encyclopedic knowledge from the 1980s and 1990s. later, dvd discs replaced cd-roms, and by the mid-2000s, internet encyclopedias were dominant and replaced disc-based software encyclopedias. [ 5 ] cd-rom encyclopedias were usually a macos or microsoft windows (3.0, 3.1 or 95/98) application on a cd-rom disc. the user would execute the encyclopedia's software program to see a menu that allowed them to start browsing the encyclopedia's articles, and most encyclopedias also supported a way to search the contents of the encyclopedia. the article text was usually hyperlinked and also included photographs , audio clips (for example in articles about historical speeches or musical instruments), and video clips . in the cd-rom age, the video clips usually had a low resolution, often 160x120 or 320x240 pixels. such encyclopedias which made use of photos, audio and video were also called multimedia encyclopedias . microsoft 's encarta , launched in 1993, was a landmark example as it had no printed equivalent. articles were supplemented with video and audio files as well as numerous high-quality images. after sixteen years, microsoft discontinued the encarta line of products in 2009. [ 51 ] other examples of cd-rom encyclopedia are grolier multimedia encyclopedia and britannica . digital encyclopedias enable "encyclopedia services" (such as wikimedia enterprise ) to facilitate programmatic access to the content. [ 52 ] the concept of a free encyclopedia began with the interpedia proposal on usenet in 1993, which outlined an internet-based online encyclopedia to which anyone could submit content that would be freely accessible. early projects in this vein included everything2 and open site . in 1999, richard stallman proposed the gnupedia , an online encyclopedia which, similar to the gnu operating system , would be a "generic" resource. the concept was very similar to interpedia, but more in line with stallman's gnu philosophy. it was not until nupedia and later wikipedia that a stable free encyclopedia project could be established on the internet. the english wikipedia , which was started in 2001, became the world's largest encyclopedia in 2004 at the 300,000 article stage. [ 54 ] by late 2005, wikipedia had produced over two million articles in more than 80 languages with content licensed under the copyleft gnu free documentation license . as of august 2009, [update] wikipedia had over 3 million articles in english and well over 10 million combined articles in over 250 languages. today, wikipedia has 6,985,217 articles in english, over 60 million combined articles in over 300 languages, and over 250 million combined pages including project and discussion pages. [ 55 ] since 2002, other free encyclopedias appeared, including hudong (2005–) and baidu baike (2006–) in chinese, and google's knol (2008–2012) in english. some mediawiki-based encyclopedias have appeared, usually under a license compatible with wikipedia, including enciclopedia libre (2002–2021) in spanish and conservapedia (2006–), scholarpedia (2006–), and citizendium (2007–) in english, the latter of which had become inactive by 2014. [ 56 ]

don't be afraid to edit – anyone can edit almost every page; just find something that can be improved and make it better! you can add content (using references to support your claims), upload free-to-use images , correct spelling and grammar mistakes, improve prose to make it more readable, or help with any number of other tasks . it's normal for new contributors to feel a little overwhelmed by all of our policies , but don't worry if you don't understand everything at first. it's fine to use common sense as you edit, and if you accidentally make a mistake, another editor can always fix or improve it later. so go ahead, edit an article, and help make wikipedia the world's best information source! suggest improvements – each article also has a "talk" page , where you can suggest improvements and corrections to the article. you're welcome to edit without creating an account, but there are many benefits of registering an account . it's quick and free. you can test out how editing feels by editing one of the "sandbox" test pages below: edit page visually or edit using wiki markup edit page visually or edit using wiki markup just type some text and click publish page when you're happy with the way it looks. don't worry about breaking anything; these pages are open areas just for experimentation! wikipedia has many community pages in addition to its articles. task center – list of tasks with which you can help help pages – support and advice community portal – the hub for editors

english is a west germanic language that originated in early medieval england and has since evolved into a global lingua franca . [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] the namesake of the language is the angles , one of the germanic peoples that migrated to britain after its roman occupiers left . english is the most spoken language in the world, primarily due to the global influences of the former british empire (succeeded by the commonwealth of nations ) and the united states . [ 7 ] english is the third-most spoken native language , after mandarin chinese and spanish ; [ 8 ] it is also the most widely learned second language in the world, with more second-language speakers than native speakers. english is either the official language or one of the official languages in 57 sovereign states (such as india , ireland , and canada ). in the united kingdom , the united states , australia , and new zealand , it is the dominant language for historical reasons without being explicitly defined by law. [ 9 ] it is a co-official language of the united nations , the european union , and many other international and regional organisations. it has also become the de facto lingua franca of diplomacy, science , technology, international trade, logistics, tourism, aviation, entertainment, and the internet . [ 10 ] english accounts for at least 70% of total native speakers of the germanic languages , and ethnologue estimated that there were over 1.5 billion speakers worldwide as of 2021 [update] . [ 3 ] old english emerged from a group of west germanic dialects spoken by the anglo-saxons . late old english borrowed some grammar and core vocabulary from old norse , a north germanic language . [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] then, middle english borrowed vocabulary extensively from french dialects , which are the source of approximately 28% of modern english words , and from latin , which is the source of an additional 28% . [ 14 ] while latin and the romance languages are thus the source for a majority of its lexicon taken as a whole, english grammar and phonology retain a family resemblance with the germanic languages, and most of its basic everyday vocabulary remains germanic in origin. english exists on a dialect continuum with scots ; it is next-most closely related to low saxon and frisian . english is an indo-european language and belongs to the west germanic group of the germanic languages . [ 15 ] old english originated from a germanic tribal and linguistic continuum along the frisian north sea coast, whose languages gradually evolved into the anglic languages in the british isles , and into the frisian languages and low german /low saxon on the continent. [ 16 ] traditionally, the frisian languages were thought to be closer to english than other languages in the west germanic family, but most modern scholars no longer consider this to be a valid characterisation of the relationship. [ 17 ] although both of these languages shared certain sound changes that did not affect other closely related languages around the north sea at the time, these sound changes were not simultaneous and thus do not reflect a unique phylogenetic relationship. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] instead, it is likely that the three ingvaeonic languages —english, frisian, and low german —share one common ancestor which acted as a dialect continuum along the north sea coast, later splitting off into the three languages during the migration period , around the 5th century. [ 16 ] old english evolved into middle english , which in turn evolved into modern english. [ 20 ] particular dialects of old and middle english also developed into a number of other anglic languages, including scots [ 21 ] and the extinct fingallian and yola dialects of ireland. [ 22 ] like icelandic and faroese , the development of english in the british isles isolated it from the continental germanic languages and their influences, and it has since diverged considerably. english is not mutually intelligible with any continental germanic language, as it differs in vocabulary , syntax , and phonology . however, some of these, such as dutch and frisian, do show strong affinities with english, especially with its earlier stages. [ 23 ] [ page needed ] because of a long series of foreign invasions of the british isles, english was influenced by various languages, especially old norse and french dialects , in contrast to icelandic and faroese, which remained isolated. these left a profound mark of their own on the language, so that english shows some similarities in vocabulary and grammar with many languages outside its linguistic clades —but it is not mutually intelligible with any of those languages either. some scholars have argued that english can be considered a mixed language or a creole —a theory called the middle english creole hypothesis . although the great influence of these languages on the vocabulary and grammar of modern english is widely acknowledged, most specialists in language contact do not consider english to be a true mixed language. [ 24 ] [ 25 ] english is classified as a germanic language because it shares innovations with other germanic languages including dutch , german , and swedish . [ 26 ] these shared innovations show that the languages have descended from a single common ancestor called proto-germanic . some shared features of germanic languages include the division of verbs into strong and weak classes, the use of modal verbs , and the sound changes affecting proto-indo-european consonants, known as grimm's and verner's laws . english is classified as an anglo-frisian language because frisian and english share other features, such as the palatalisation of consonants that were velar consonants in proto-germanic (see phonological history of old english § palatalization ). [ 27 ] the earliest varieties of an english language, collectively known as old english or "anglo-saxon", evolved from a group of north sea germanic dialects brought to britain in the 5th century. old english dialects were later influenced by old norse -speaking viking invaders and settlers , starting in the 8th and 9th centuries. middle english began in the late 11th century after the norman conquest of england, when a considerable amount of old french vocabulary was incorporated into english over some three centuries. [ 28 ] [ 29 ] early modern english began in the late 15th century with the start of the great vowel shift and the renaissance trend of borrowing further latin and greek words and roots, concurrent with the introduction of the printing press to london. this era notably culminated in the king james bible and the works of william shakespeare . [ 30 ] [ 31 ] the printing press greatly standardised english spelling, [ 32 ] which has remained largely unchanged since then, despite a wide variety of later sound shifts in english dialects. modern english has spread around the world since the 17th century as a consequence of the worldwide influence of the british empire and the united states. through all types of printed and electronic media in these countries, english has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and professional contexts such as science, navigation , and law. [ 4 ] its modern grammar is the result of a gradual change from a dependent-marking pattern typical of indo-european with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection and a fairly fixed subject–verb–object word order . [ 33 ] modern english relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses , aspects and moods , as well as passive constructions , interrogatives , and some negation . the earliest form of english is called old english or anglo-saxon ( c. 450–1150 ). old english developed from a set of west germanic dialects, often grouped as anglo-frisian or north sea germanic , and originally spoken along the coasts of frisia , lower saxony and southern jutland by germanic peoples known to the historical record as the angles , saxons , and jutes . [ 34 ] from the 5th century, the anglo-saxons settled britain as the roman economy and administration collapsed . by the 7th century, this germanic language of the anglo-saxons became dominant in britain , replacing the languages of roman britain (43–409): common brittonic , a celtic language , and british latin , brought to britain by the roman occupation. [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] at this time, these dialects generally resisted influence from the then-local brittonic and latin languages. england and english (originally ænglaland and ænglisc ) are both named after the angles. [ 38 ] english may have a small amount of substrate influence from common brittonic, and a number of possible brittonicisms in english have been proposed, but whether most of these supposed brittonicisms are actually a direct result of brittonic substrate influence is disputed. old english was divided into four dialects: the anglian dialects ( mercian and northumbrian ) and the saxon dialects ( kentish and west saxon ). [ 39 ] through the educational reforms of king alfred in the 9th century and the influence of the kingdom of wessex , the west saxon dialect became the standard written variety . [ 40 ] the epic poem beowulf is written in west saxon, and the earliest english poem, cædmon's hymn , is written in northumbrian. [ 41 ] modern english developed mainly from mercian, but the scots language developed from northumbrian. a few short inscriptions from the early period of old english were written using a runic script . [ 42 ] by the 6th century, a latin alphabet was adopted, written with half-uncial letterforms . it included the runic letters wynn ⟨ ƿ ⟩ and thorn ⟨ þ ⟩ , and the modified latin letters eth ⟨ ð ⟩ , and ash ⟨ æ ⟩ . [ 42 ] [ 43 ] old english is essentially a distinct language from modern english and is virtually impossible for 21st-century unstudied english-speakers to understand. its grammar was similar to that of modern german: nouns, adjectives, pronouns, and verbs had many more inflectional endings and forms , and word order was much freer than in modern english. modern english has case forms in pronouns ( he , him , his ) and has a few verb inflections ( speak , speaks , speaking , spoke , spoken ), but old english had case endings in nouns as well, and verbs had more person and number endings. [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] its closest relative is old frisian , but even some centuries after the anglo-saxon migration, old english retained considerable mutual intelligibility with other germanic varieties. even in the 9th and 10th centuries, amidst the danelaw and other viking invasions, there is historical evidence that old norse and old english retained considerable mutual intelligibility, [ 47 ] although probably the northern dialects of old english were more similar to old norse than the southern dialects. theoretically, as late as the 900s ad, a commoner from certain (northern) parts of england could hold a conversation with a commoner from certain parts of scandinavia. research continues into the details of the myriad tribes in peoples in england and scandinavia and the mutual contacts between them. [ 47 ] the translation of matthew 8:20 from 1000 shows examples of case endings ( nominative plural, accusative plural, genitive singular) and a verb ending ( present plural): from the 8th to the 11th centuries, old english gradually transformed through language contact with old norse in some regions. the waves of norse (viking) colonisation of northern parts of the british isles in the 8th and 9th centuries put old english into intense contact with old norse , a north germanic language. norse influence was strongest in the north-eastern varieties of old english spoken in the danelaw area around york, which was the centre of norse colonisation; today these features are still particularly present in scots and northern english . the centre of norsified english was in the midlands around lindsey . after 920 ce, when lindsey was incorporated into the anglo-saxon polity, english spread extensively throughout the region. an element of norse influence that continues in all english varieties today is the third person pronoun group beginning with th- ( they, them, their ) which replaced the anglo-saxon pronouns with h- ( hie, him, hera ). [ 49 ] other core norse loanwords include "give", "get", "sky", "skirt", "egg", and "cake", typically displacing a native anglo-saxon equivalent. old norse in this era retained considerable mutual intelligibility with some dialects of old english, particularly northern ones. englischmen þeyz hy hadde fram þe bygynnyng þre manner speche, souþeron, northeron, and myddel speche in þe myddel of þe lond, ... noþeles by comyxstion and mellyng, furst wiþ danes, and afterward wiþ normans, in menye þe contray longage ys asperyed, and som vseþ strange wlaffyng, chyteryng, harryng, and garryng grisbytting. although, from the beginning, englishmen had three manners of speaking, southern, northern and midlands speech in the middle of the country, ... nevertheless, through intermingling and mixing, first with danes and then with normans, amongst many the country language has arisen, and some use strange stammering, chattering, snarling, and grating gnashing. middle english is often arbitrarily defined as beginning with the conquest of england by william the conqueror in 1066, but it developed further in the period from 1150 to 1500. [ 51 ] with the norman conquest of england in 1066, the now-norsified old english language was subject to another wave of intense contact, this time with old french , in particular old norman french , influencing it as a superstrate. the norman french spoken by the elite in england eventually developed into the anglo-norman language . [ 28 ] because norman was spoken primarily by the elites and nobles, while the lower classes continued speaking english, the main influence of norman was the introduction of a wide range of loanwords related to politics, legislation and prestigious social domains. [ 13 ] [ example needed ] middle english also greatly simplified the inflectional system, probably in order to reconcile old norse and old english, which were inflectionally different but morphologically similar. the distinction between nominative and accusative cases was lost except in personal pronouns, the instrumental case was dropped, and the use of the genitive case was limited to indicating possession . the inflectional system regularised many irregular inflectional forms, [ 52 ] and gradually simplified the system of agreement, making word order less flexible. [ 53 ] the transition from old to middle english can be placed during the writing of the ormulum . [ 54 ] the oldest middle english texts were written by the augustinian canon orrm , and highlight the blending of both old english and anglo-norman elements in english for the first time. in wycliff'e bible of the 1380s, the verse matthew 8:20 was written: foxis han dennes, and briddis of heuene han nestis . [ 55 ] here the plural suffix -n on the verb have is still retained, but none of the case endings on the nouns are present. by the 12th century middle english was fully developed, integrating both norse and french features; it continued to be spoken until the transition to early modern english around 1500. middle english literature includes geoffrey chaucer 's the canterbury tales , and thomas malory 's le morte d'arthur . in the middle english period, the use of regional dialects in writing proliferated, and dialect traits were even used for effect by authors such as chaucer. [ 56 ] the next period in the history of english was early modern english (1500–1700). early modern english was characterised by the great vowel shift (1350–1700), inflectional simplification, and linguistic standardisation. the great vowel shift affected the stressed long vowels of middle english. it was a chain shift , meaning that each shift triggered a subsequent shift in the vowel system. mid and open vowels were raised , and close vowels were broken into diphthongs . for example, the word bite was originally pronounced as the word beet is today, and the second vowel in the word about was pronounced as the word boot is today. the great vowel shift explains many irregularities in spelling since english retains many spellings from middle english, and it also explains why english vowel letters have very different pronunciations from the same letters in other languages. [ 57 ] [ 58 ] english began to rise in prestige, relative to norman french, during the reign of henry v . around 1430, the court of chancery in westminster began using english in its official documents , and a new standard form of middle english, known as chancery standard , developed from the dialects of london and the east midlands . in 1476, william caxton introduced the printing press to england and began publishing the first printed books in london, expanding the influence of this form of english. [ 59 ] literature from the early modern period includes the works of william shakespeare and the translation of the bible commissioned by king james i . even after the vowel shift the language still sounded different from modern english: for example, the consonant clusters /kn ɡn sw/ in knight , gnat , and sword were still pronounced. many of the grammatical features that a modern reader of shakespeare might find quaint or archaic represent the distinct characteristics of early modern english. [ 60 ] in the 1611 king james version of the bible, written in early modern english, matthew 8:20 says, "the foxes haue holes and the birds of the ayre haue nests." [ 48 ] this exemplifies the loss of case and its effects on sentence structure (replacement with subject–verb–object word order, and the use of of instead of the non-possessive genitive), and the introduction of loanwords from french ( ayre ) and word replacements ( bird originally meaning 'nestling' had replaced oe fugol ). [ 48 ] by the late 18th century, the british empire had spread english through its colonies and geopolitical dominance. commerce, science and technology, diplomacy, art, and formal education all contributed to english becoming the first truly global language. english also facilitated worldwide international communication. [ 30 ] [ 4 ] english was adopted in parts of north america, parts of africa, oceania, and many other regions. when they obtained political independence, some of the newly independent states that had multiple indigenous languages opted to continue using english as the official language to avoid the political and other difficulties inherent in promoting any one indigenous language above the others. [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] in the 20th century the growing economic and cultural influence of the united states and its status as a superpower following the second world war has, along with worldwide broadcasting in english by the bbc [ 64 ] and other broadcasters, caused the language to spread across the planet much faster. [ 65 ] [ 66 ] in the 21st century, english is more widely spoken and written than any language has ever been. [ 67 ] as modern english developed, explicit norms for standard usage were published, and spread through official media such as public education and state-sponsored publications. in 1755, samuel johnson published his a dictionary of the english language , which introduced standard spellings of words and usage norms. in 1828, noah webster published the american dictionary of the english language to try to establish a norm for speaking and writing american english that was independent of the british standard. within britain, non-standard or lower class dialect features were increasingly stigmatised, leading to the quick spread of the prestige varieties among the middle classes. [ 68 ] in modern english, the loss of grammatical case is almost complete (it is now only found in pronouns, such as he and him , she and her , who and whom ), and svo word order is mostly fixed. [ 68 ] some changes, such as the use of do -support , have become universalised. (earlier english did not use the word do as a general auxiliary as modern english does; at first it was only used in question constructions, and even then was not obligatory. [ 69 ] now, do -support with the verb have is becoming increasingly standardised.) the use of progressive forms in -ing , appears to be spreading to new constructions, and forms such as had been being built are becoming more common. regularisation of irregular forms also slowly continues (e.g. dreamed instead of dreamt ), and analytical alternatives to inflectional forms are becoming more common (e.g. more polite instead of politer ). british english is also undergoing change under the influence of american english, fuelled by the strong presence of american english in the media and the prestige associated with the united states as a world power. [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] as of 2016 [update] , 400 million people spoke english as their first language , and 1.1 billion spoke it as a secondary language. [ 74 ] english is the largest language by number of speakers . english is spoken by communities on every continent and on islands in all the major oceans. [ 75 ] the countries where english is spoken can be grouped into different categories according to how english is used in each country. the "inner circle" [ 76 ] countries with many native speakers of english share an international standard of written english and jointly influence speech norms for english around the world. english does not belong to just one country, and it does not belong solely to descendants of english settlers. english is an official language of countries populated by few descendants of native speakers of english. it has also become by far the most important language of international communication when people who share no native language meet anywhere in the world. the indian linguist braj kachru distinguished countries where english is spoken with a three circles model : [ 76 ] kachru based his model on the history of how english spread in different countries, how users acquire english, and the range of uses english has in each country. the three circles change membership over time. [ 77 ] countries with large communities of native speakers of english (the inner circle) include britain, the united states, australia, canada, ireland, and new zealand, where the majority speaks english, and south africa, where a significant minority speaks english. the countries with the most native english speakers are, in descending order, the united states (at least 231 million), [ 78 ] the united kingdom (60 million), [ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] canada (19 million), [ 82 ] australia (at least 17 million), [ 83 ] south africa (4.8 million), [ 84 ] ireland (4.2 million), and new zealand (3.7 million). [ 85 ] in these countries, children of native speakers learn english from their parents, and local people who speak other languages and new immigrants learn english to communicate in their neighbourhoods and workplaces. [ 86 ] the inner-circle countries provide the base from which english spreads to other countries in the world. [ 77 ] estimates of the numbers of second language and foreign-language english speakers vary greatly from 470 million to more than 1 billion, depending on how proficiency is defined. [ 9 ] linguist david crystal estimates that non-native speakers now outnumber native speakers by a ratio of 3 to 1. [ 87 ] in kachru's three-circles model, the "outer circle" countries are countries such as the philippines , [ 88 ] jamaica , [ 89 ] india , pakistan , singapore , [ 90 ] malaysia and nigeria [ 91 ] [ 92 ] with a much smaller proportion of native speakers of english but much use of english as a second language for education, government, or domestic business, and its routine use for school instruction and official interactions with the government. [ 93 ] those countries have millions of native speakers of dialect continua ranging from an english-based creole to a more standard version of english. they have many more speakers of english who acquire english as they grow up through day-to-day use and listening to broadcasting, especially if they attend schools where english is the medium of instruction. varieties of english learned by non-native speakers born to english-speaking parents may be influenced, especially in their grammar, by the other languages spoken by those learners. [ 86 ] most of those varieties of english include words little used by native speakers of english in the inner-circle countries, [ 86 ] and they may show grammatical and phonological differences from inner-circle varieties as well. the standard english of the inner-circle countries is often taken as a norm for use of english in the outer-circle countries. [ 86 ] in the three-circles model, countries such as poland, china, brazil, germany, japan, indonesia, egypt, and other countries where english is taught as a foreign language, make up the "expanding circle". [ 94 ] the distinctions between english as a first language, as a second language, and as a foreign language are often debatable and may change in particular countries over time. [ 93 ] for example, in the netherlands and some other countries of europe, knowledge of english as a second language is nearly universal, with over 80 percent of the population able to use it, [ 95 ] and thus english is routinely used to communicate with foreigners and often in higher education. in these countries, although english is not used for government business, its widespread use puts them at the boundary between the "outer circle" and "expanding circle". english is unusual among world languages in how many of its users are not native speakers but speakers of english as a second or foreign language. [ 96 ] many users of english in the expanding circle use it to communicate with other people from the expanding circle, so that interaction with native speakers of english plays no part in their decision to use the language. [ 97 ] non-native varieties of english are widely used for international communication, and speakers of one such variety often encounter features of other varieties. [ 98 ] very often today a conversation in english anywhere in the world may include no native speakers of english at all, even while including speakers from several different countries. this is particularly true of the shared vocabulary of mathematics and the sciences. [ 99 ] english is a pluricentric language , which means that no one national authority sets the standard for use of the language. [ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] spoken english, including english used in broadcasting, generally follows national pronunciation standards that are established by custom rather than by regulation. international broadcasters are usually identifiable as coming from one country rather than another through their accents , [ 104 ] but newsreader scripts are also composed largely in international standard written english . the norms of standard written english are maintained purely by the consensus of educated english speakers around the world, without any oversight by any government or international organisation. [ 105 ] american listeners readily understand most british broadcasting, and british listeners readily understand most american broadcasting. most english speakers around the world can understand radio programmes, television programmes, and films from many parts of the english-speaking world. [ 106 ] both standard and non-standard varieties of english can include both formal or informal styles, distinguished by word choice and syntax and use both technical and non-technical registers. [ 107 ] the settlement history of the english-speaking inner circle countries outside britain helped level dialect distinctions and produce koineised forms of english in south africa, australia, and new zealand. [ 108 ] the majority of immigrants to the united states without british ancestry rapidly adopted english after arrival. now the majority of the united states population are monolingual english speakers. [ 78 ] [ 109 ] english has ceased to be an "english language" in the sense of belonging only to people who are ethnically english . [ 123 ] [ 124 ] use of english is growing country-by-country internally and for international communication. most people learn english for practical rather than ideological reasons. [ 125 ] many speakers of english in africa have become part of an "afro-saxon" language community that unites africans from different countries. [ 126 ] as decolonisation proceeded throughout the british empire in the 1950s and 1960s, former colonies often did not reject english but rather continued to use it as independent countries setting their own language policies. [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 127 ] for example, the view of the english language among many indians has gone from associating it with colonialism to associating it with economic progress, and english continues to be an official language of india. [ 128 ] english is also widely used in media and literature, and the number of english language books published annually in india is the third largest in the world after the us and uk. [ 129 ] however, english is rarely spoken as a first language, numbering only around a couple hundred-thousand people, and less than 5% of the population speak fluent english in india. [ 130 ] [ 131 ] david crystal claimed in 2004 that, combining native and non-native speakers, india now has more people who speak or understand english than any other country in the world, [ 132 ] but the number of english speakers in india is uncertain, with most scholars concluding that the united states still has more speakers of english than india. [ 133 ] modern english, sometimes described as the first global lingua franca , [ 65 ] [ 134 ] is also regarded as the first world language . [ 135 ] [ 136 ] english is the world's most widely used language in newspaper publishing, book publishing, international telecommunications, scientific publishing, international trade, mass entertainment, and diplomacy. [ 136 ] english is, by international treaty, the basis for the required controlled natural languages [ 137 ] seaspeak and airspeak, used as international languages of seafaring [ 138 ] and aviation. [ 139 ] english used to have parity with french and german in scientific research, but now it dominates that field. [ 140 ] it achieved parity with french as a language of diplomacy at the treaty of versailles negotiations in 1919. [ 141 ] by the time of the foundation of the united nations at the end of world war ii , english had become pre-eminent [ 142 ] and is now the main worldwide language of diplomacy and international relations. [ 143 ] it is one of six official languages of the united nations. [ 144 ] many other worldwide international organisations, including the international olympic committee , specify english as a working language or official language of the organisation. many regional international organisations such as the european free trade association , association of southeast asian nations (asean), [ 66 ] and asia-pacific economic cooperation (apec) set english as their organisation's sole working language even though most members are not countries with a majority of native english speakers. while the european union (eu) allows member states to designate any of the national languages as an official language of the union, in practice english is the main working language of eu organisations. [ 145 ] although in most countries english is not an official language, it is currently the language most often taught as a foreign language . [ 65 ] [ 66 ] in the countries of the eu, english is the most widely spoken foreign language in nineteen of the twenty-five member states where it is not an official language (that is, the countries other than ireland and malta ). in a 2012 official eurobarometer poll (conducted when the uk was still a member of the eu), 38 percent of the eu respondents outside the countries where english is an official language said they could speak english well enough to have a conversation in that language. the next most commonly mentioned foreign language, french (which is the most widely known foreign language in the uk and ireland), could be used in conversation by 12 percent of respondents. [ 146 ] a working knowledge of english has become a requirement in a number of occupations and professions such as medicine [ 147 ] and computing. english has become so important in scientific publishing that more than 80 percent of all scientific journal articles indexed by chemical abstracts in 1998 were written in english, as were 90 percent of all articles in natural science publications by 1996 and 82 percent of articles in humanities publications by 1995. [ 148 ] international communities such as international business people may use english as an auxiliary language , with an emphasis on vocabulary suitable for their domain of interest. this has led some scholars to develop the study of english as an auxiliary language. the trademarked globish uses a relatively small subset of english vocabulary (about 1500 words, designed to represent the highest use in international business english) in combination with the standard english grammar. [ 149 ] other examples include simple english . the increased use of the english language globally has had an effect on other languages, leading to some english words being assimilated into the vocabularies of other languages. this influence of english has led to concerns about language death , [ 150 ] and to claims of linguistic imperialism , [ 151 ] and has provoked resistance to the spread of english; however the number of speakers continues to increase because many people around the world think that english provides them with opportunities for better employment and improved lives. [ 152 ] though some mention a possibility of divergence of english dialects into mutually unintelligible languages, most think a more likely outcome is that english will continue to function as a koineised language, in which the standard form unifies speakers from around the world. [ 153 ] english is used as the language for wider communication in countries around the world. [ 154 ] thus english has grown in worldwide use much more than any constructed language proposed as an international auxiliary language , including esperanto . [ 155 ] [ 156 ] the phonetics and phonology of the english language differ from one dialect to another, usually without interfering with mutual communication. phonological variation affects the inventory of phonemes (i.e. speech sounds that distinguish meaning), and phonetic variation consists in differences in pronunciation of the phonemes. [ 157 ] this overview mainly describes the standard pronunciations of the united kingdom and the united states : received pronunciation (rp) and general american (ga). (see § dialects, accents and varieties , below.) the phonetic symbols used below are from the international phonetic alphabet (ipa). [ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] most english dialects share the same 24 (or 26 if marginal /x/ and glottal stop (/ʔ/) included) consonant phonemes. the consonant inventory shown below is valid for california english , [ 161 ] and for rp. [ 162 ] in the table, when obstruents (stops, affricates, and fricatives) appear in pairs, such as /p b/ , /tʃ dʒ/ , and /s z/ , the first is fortis (strong) and the second is lenis (weak). fortis obstruents, such as /p tʃ s/ are pronounced with more muscular tension and breath force than lenis consonants, such as /b dʒ z/ , and are always voiceless . lenis consonants are partly voiced at the beginning and end of utterances, and fully voiced between vowels. fortis stops such as /p/ have additional articulatory or acoustic features in most dialects: they are aspirated [pʰ] when they occur alone at the beginning of a stressed syllable, often unaspirated in other cases, and often unreleased [p̚] or pre-glottalised [ʔp] at the end of a syllable. in a single-syllable word, a vowel before a fortis stop is shortened: thus nip has a noticeably shorter vowel (phonetically, but not phonemically) than nib [nɪˑb̥] ( see below ). [ 163 ] in rp, the lateral approximant /l/ , has two main allophones (pronunciation variants): the clear or plain [l] , as in light , and the dark or velarised [ɫ] , as in full . [ 164 ] ga has dark l in most cases. [ 165 ] all sonorants (liquids /l, r/ and nasals /m, n, ŋ/ ) devoice when following a voiceless obstruent, and they are syllabic when following a consonant at the end of a word. [ 166 ] the pronunciation of vowels varies a great deal between dialects and is one of the most detectable aspects of a speaker's accent. the table below lists the vowel phonemes in received pronunciation (rp) and general american (ga), with examples of words in which they occur from lexical sets compiled by linguists. the vowels are represented with symbols from the international phonetic alphabet; those given for rp are standard in british dictionaries and other publications. [ 167 ] in rp, vowel length is phonemic; long vowels are marked with a triangular colon ⟨ ː ⟩ in the table above, such as the vowel of need [niːd] as opposed to bid [bɪd] . in ga, vowel length is non-distinctive. in both rp and ga, vowels are phonetically shortened before fortis consonants in the same syllable , like /t tʃ f/ , but not before lenis consonants like /d dʒ v/ or in open syllables: thus, the vowels of rich [rɪtʃ] , neat [nit] , and safe [seɪ̯f] are noticeably shorter than the vowels of ridge [rɪˑdʒ] , need [niˑd] , and save [seˑɪ̯v] , and the vowel of light [laɪ̯t] is shorter than that of lie [laˑɪ̯] . because lenis consonants are frequently voiceless at the end of a syllable, vowel length is an important cue as to whether the following consonant is lenis or fortis. [ 168 ] the vowel /ə/ only occurs in unstressed syllables and is more open in quality in stem-final positions. [ 169 ] [ 170 ] some dialects do not contrast /ɪ/ and /ə/ in unstressed positions, such that rabbit and abbot rhyme and lenin and lennon are homophonous, a dialectal feature called the weak vowel merger . [ 171 ] ga /ɜr/ and /ər/ are realised as an r -coloured vowel [ɚ] , as in further [ˈfɚðɚ] (phonemically /ˈfɜrðər/ ), which in rp is realised as [ˈfəːðə] (phonemically /ˈfɜːðə/ ). [ 172 ] an english syllable includes a syllable nucleus consisting of a vowel sound. syllable onset and coda (start and end) are optional. a syllable can start with up to three consonant sounds, as in sprint /sprɪnt/ , and end with up to five, as in (for some dialects) angsts /aŋksts/ . this gives an english syllable the following structure, (ccc)v(ccccc), where c represents a consonant and v a vowel; the word strengths /strɛŋkθs/ is thus close to the most complex syllable possible in english. the consonants that may appear together in onsets or codas are restricted, as is the order in which they may appear. onsets can only have four types of consonant clusters: a stop and approximant, as in play ; a voiceless fricative and approximant, as in fly or sly ; s and a voiceless stop, as in stay ; and s , a voiceless stop, and an approximant, as in string . [ 173 ] clusters of nasal and stop are only allowed in codas. clusters of obstruents always agree in voicing, and clusters of sibilants and of plosives with the same point of articulation are prohibited. several consonants have limited distributions: /h/ can only occur in syllable-initial position, and /ŋ/ only in syllable-final position. [ 174 ] stress plays an important role in english. certain syllables are stressed, while others are unstressed. stress is a combination of duration, intensity, vowel quality, and sometimes changes in pitch. stressed syllables are pronounced longer and louder than unstressed syllables, and vowels in unstressed syllables are frequently reduced while vowels in stressed syllables are not. [ 175 ] some words, primarily short function words but also some modal verbs such as can , have weak and strong forms depending on whether they occur in stressed or non-stressed position within a sentence. stress in english is phonemic , and some pairs of words are distinguished by stress. for instance, the word contract is stressed on the first syllable ( / ˈ k ɒ n t r æ k t / kon -trakt ) when used as a noun, but on the last syllable ( / k ə n ˈ t r æ k t / kən- trakt ) for most meanings (for example, "reduce in size") when used as a verb. [ 176 ] [ 177 ] [ 178 ] here stress is connected to vowel reduction : in the noun "contract" the first syllable is stressed and has the unreduced vowel /ɒ/ , but in the verb "contract" the first syllable is unstressed and its vowel is reduced to /ə/ . stress is also used to distinguish between words and phrases, so that a compound word receives a single stress unit, but the corresponding phrase has two: e.g. a burnout ( / ˈ b ɜːr n aʊ t / ) versus to burn out ( / ˈ b ɜːr n ˈ aʊ t / ), and a hotdog ( / ˈ h ɒ t d ɒ ɡ / ) versus a hot dog ( / ˈ h ɒ t ˈ d ɒ ɡ / ). [ 179 ] in terms of rhythm , english is generally described as a stress-timed language, meaning that the amount of time between stressed syllables tends to be equal. [ 180 ] stressed syllables are pronounced longer, but unstressed syllables (syllables between stresses) are shortened. vowels in unstressed syllables are shortened as well, and vowel shortening causes changes in vowel quality : vowel reduction . [ 181 ] varieties of english vary the most in pronunciation of vowels. the best-known national varieties used as standards for education in non-english-speaking countries are british (bre) and american (ame). countries such as canada , australia , ireland , new zealand and south africa have their own standard varieties which are less often used as standards for education internationally. some differences between the various dialects are shown in the table "varieties of standard english and their features". [ 182 ] english has undergone many historical sound changes , some of them affecting all varieties, and others affecting only a few. most standard varieties are affected by the great vowel shift , which changed the pronunciation of long vowels, but a few dialects have slightly different results. in north america, a number of chain shifts such as the northern cities vowel shift and canadian shift have produced very different vowel landscapes in some regional accents. [ 183 ] some dialects have fewer or more consonant phonemes and phones than the standard varieties. some conservative varieties like scottish english have a voiceless [ ʍ ] sound in whine that contrasts with the voiced [w] in wine , but most other dialects pronounce both words with voiced [w] , a dialect feature called wine – whine merger . the voiceless velar fricative sound /x/ is found in scottish english, which distinguishes loch /lɔx/ from lock /lɔk/ . accents like cockney with " h -dropping " lack the glottal fricative /h/ , and dialects with th -stopping and th -fronting like african-american vernacular and estuary english do not have the dental fricatives /θ, ð/ , but replace them with dental or alveolar stops /t, d/ or labiodental fricatives /f, v/ . [ 184 ] [ 185 ] other changes affecting the phonology of local varieties are processes such as yod -dropping , yod -coalescence , and reduction of consonant clusters. [ 186 ] [ page needed ] general american and received pronunciation vary in their pronunciation of historical /r/ after a vowel at the end of a syllable (in the syllable coda ). ga is a rhotic dialect , meaning that it pronounces /r/ at the end of a syllable, but rp is non-rhotic, meaning that it loses /r/ in that position. english dialects are classified as rhotic or non-rhotic depending on whether they elide /r/ like rp or keep it like ga. [ 187 ] there is complex dialectal variation in words with the open front and open back vowels /æ ɑː ɒ ɔː/ . these four vowels are only distinguished in rp, australia, new zealand and south africa. in ga, these vowels merge to three /æ ɑ ɔ/ , [ 188 ] and in canadian english, they merge to two /æ ɑ/ . [ 189 ] in addition, the words that have each vowel vary by dialect. the table "dialects and open vowels" shows this variation with lexical sets in which these sounds occur. as is typical of an indo-european language, english follows accusative morphosyntactic alignment . unlike other indo-european languages, english has largely abandoned the inflectional case system in favour of analytic constructions. only the personal pronouns retain morphological case more strongly than any other word class . english distinguishes at least seven major word classes: verbs, nouns, adjectives, adverbs, determiners (including articles), prepositions, and conjunctions. some analyses add pronouns as a class separate from nouns, and subdivide conjunctions into subordinators and coordinators , and add the class of interjections. [ 190 ] english also has a rich set of auxiliary verbs, such as have and do , expressing the categories of mood and aspect. questions are marked by do -support , wh -movement (fronting of question words beginning with wh -) and word order inversion with some verbs. [ 191 ] some traits typical of germanic languages persist in english, such as the distinction between irregularly inflected strong stems inflected through ablaut (i.e. changing the vowel of the stem, as in the pairs speak / spoke and foot / feet ) and weak stems inflected through affixation (such as love / loved , hand / hands ). [ 192 ] vestiges of the case and gender system are found in the pronoun system ( he / him , who / whom ) and in the inflection of the copula verb to be . [ 192 ] the seven word-classes are exemplified in this sample sentence: [ 193 ] english nouns are only inflected for number and possession. new nouns can be formed through derivation or compounding. they are semantically divided into proper nouns (names) and common nouns. common nouns are in turn divided into concrete and abstract nouns, and grammatically into count nouns and mass nouns . [ 194 ] most count nouns are inflected for plural number through the use of the plural suffix - s , but a few nouns have irregular plural forms. mass nouns can only be pluralised through the use of a count noun classifier, e.g. one loaf of bread , two loaves of bread . [ 195 ] possession can be expressed either by the possessive enclitic - s (also traditionally called a genitive suffix), or by the preposition of . historically the -s possessive has been used for animate nouns, whereas the of possessive has been reserved for inanimate nouns. today this distinction is less clear, and many speakers use - s also with inanimates. orthographically the possessive -s is separated from a singular noun with an apostrophe. if the noun is plural formed with -s the apostrophe follows the -s. [ 191 ] nouns can form noun phrases (nps) where they are the syntactic head of the words that depend on them such as determiners, quantifiers, conjunctions or adjectives. [ 196 ] noun phrases can be short, such as the man , composed only of a determiner and a noun. they can also include modifiers such as adjectives (e.g. red , tall , all ) and specifiers such as determiners (e.g. the , that ). but they can also tie together several nouns into a single long np, using conjunctions such as and , or prepositions such as with , e.g. the tall man with the long red trousers and his skinny wife with the spectacles (this np uses conjunctions, prepositions, specifiers, and modifiers). regardless of length, an np functions as a syntactic unit. [ 191 ] for example, the possessive enclitic can, in cases which do not lead to ambiguity, follow the entire noun phrase, as in the president of india's wife , where the enclitic follows india and not president . the class of determiners is used to specify the noun they precede in terms of definiteness , where the marks a definite noun and a or an an indefinite one. a definite noun is assumed by the speaker to be already known by the interlocutor, whereas an indefinite noun is not specified as being previously known. quantifiers, which include one , many , some and all , are used to specify the noun in terms of quantity or number. the noun must agree with the number of the determiner, e.g. one man (sg.) but all men (pl.). determiners are the first constituents in a noun phrase. [ 197 ] english adjectives are words such as good , big , interesting, and canadian that most typically modify nouns, denoting characteristics of their referents (e.g., a red car ). as modifiers, they come before the nouns they modify and after determiners. [ 198 ] english adjectives also function as predicative complements (e.g., the child is happy ). in modern english, adjectives are not inflected so as to agree in form with the noun they modify, as in most other indo-european languages. for example, in the phrases the slender boy , and many slender girls , the adjective slender does not change form to agree with either the number or gender of the noun. some adjectives are inflected for degree of comparison , with the positive degree unmarked, the suffix -er marking the comparative, and -est marking the superlative: a small boy , the boy is smaller than the girl , that boy is the smallest . some adjectives have irregular suppletive comparative and superlative forms, such as good , better , and best . other adjectives have comparatives formed by periphrastic constructions , with the adverb more marking the comparative, and most marking the superlative: happier or more happy , the happiest or most happy . [ 199 ] there is some variation among speakers regarding which adjectives use inflected or periphrastic comparison, and some studies have shown a tendency for the periphrastic forms to become more common at the expense of the inflected form. [ 200 ] english determiners are words such as the , each , many , some , and which , occurring most typically in noun phrases before the head nouns and any modifiers and marking the noun phrase as definite or indefinite. [ 201 ] they often agree with the noun in number . they do not typically inflect for degree of comparison. english pronouns conserve many traits of case and gender inflection. the personal pronouns retain a difference between subjective and objective case in most persons ( i / me , he / him , she / her , we / us , they / them ) as well as an animateness distinction in the third person singular (distinguishing it from the three sets of animate third person singular pronouns) and an optional gender distinction in the animate third person singular (distinguishing between she / her [feminine], they / them [ epicene ], and he / him [masculine]). [ 202 ] [ 203 ] the subjective case corresponds to the old english nominative case , and the objective case is used in the sense both of the previous accusative case (for a patient, or direct object of a transitive verb), and of the old english dative case (for a recipient or indirect object of a transitive verb). [ 204 ] [ 205 ] the subjective is used when the pronoun is the subject of a finite clause, otherwise the objective is used. [ 206 ] while grammarians such as henry sweet [ 207 ] and otto jespersen [ 208 ] noted that the english cases did not correspond to the traditional latin-based system, some contemporary grammars, for example huddleston & pullum (2002) , retain traditional labels for the cases, calling them nominative and accusative cases respectively. possessive pronouns exist in dependent and independent forms; the dependent form functions as a determiner specifying a noun (as in my chair ), while the independent form can stand alone as if it were a noun (e.g. the chair is mine ). [ 209 ] the english system of grammatical person no longer has a distinction between formal and informal pronouns of address (the old second person singular familiar pronoun thou acquired a pejorative or inferior tinge of meaning and was abandoned). both the second and third persons share pronouns between the plural and singular: pronouns are used to refer to entities deictically or anaphorically . a deictic pronoun points to some person or object by identifying it relative to the speech situation—for example, the pronoun i identifies the speaker, and the pronoun you , the addressee. anaphoric pronouns such as that refer back to an entity already mentioned or assumed by the speaker to be known by the audience, for example in the sentence i already told you that . the reflexive pronouns are used when the oblique argument is identical to the subject of a phrase (e.g. "he sent it to himself" or "she braced herself for impact"). [ 212 ] prepositional phrases (pp) are phrases composed of a preposition and one or more nouns, e.g. with the dog , for my friend , to school , in england . [ 213 ] prepositions have a wide range of uses in english. they are used to describe movement, place, and other relations between different entities, but they also have many syntactic uses such as introducing complement clauses and oblique arguments of verbs. [ 213 ] for example, in the phrase i gave it to him , the preposition to marks the recipient, or indirect object of the verb to give . traditionally words were only considered prepositions if they governed the case of the noun they preceded, for example causing the pronouns to use the objective rather than subjective form, "with her", "to me", "for us". but some contemporary grammars no longer consider government of case to be the defining feature of the class of prepositions, rather defining prepositions as words that can function as the heads of prepositional phrases. [ 214 ] english verbs are inflected for tense and aspect and marked for agreement with present-tense third-person singular subject. only the copula verb to be is still inflected for agreement with the plural and first and second person subjects. [ 199 ] auxiliary verbs such as have and be are paired with verbs in the infinitive, past, or progressive forms. they form complex tenses, aspects, and moods. auxiliary verbs differ from other verbs in that they can be followed by the negation, and in that they can occur as the first constituent in a question sentence. [ 215 ] [ 216 ] most verbs have six inflectional forms. the primary forms are a plain present, a third-person singular present, and a preterite (past) form. the secondary forms are a plain form used for the infinitive, a gerund-participle and a past participle. [ 217 ] the copula verb to be is the only verb to retain some of its original conjugation, and takes different inflectional forms depending on the subject. the first-person present-tense form is am , the third person singular form is is , and the form are is used in the second-person singular and all three plurals. the only verb past participle is been and its gerund-participle is being . english has two primary tenses, past (preterite) and non-past. the preterite is inflected by using the preterite form of the verb, which for the regular verbs includes the suffix -ed , and for the strong verbs either the suffix -t or a change in the stem vowel. the non-past form is unmarked except in the third person singular, which takes the suffix -s . [ 215 ] english does not have future verb forms. [ 218 ] the future tense is expressed periphrastically with one of the auxiliary verbs will or shall . [ 219 ] many varieties also use a near future constructed with the phrasal verb be going to (" going-to future "). [ 220 ] further aspectual distinctions are shown by auxiliary verbs, primarily have and be , which show the contrast between a perfect and non-perfect past tense ( i have run vs. i was running ), and compound tenses such as preterite perfect ( i had been running ) and present perfect ( i have been running ). [ 221 ] for the expression of mood, english uses a number of modal auxiliaries, such as can , may , will , shall and the past tense forms could , might , would , should . there are also subjunctive and imperative moods , both based on the plain form of the verb (i.e. without the third person singular -s ), for use in subordinate clauses (e.g. subjunctive: it is important that he run every day ; imperative run! ). [ 219 ] an infinitive form, that uses the plain form of the verb and the preposition to , is used for verbal clauses that are syntactically subordinate to a finite verbal clause. finite verbal clauses are those that are formed around a verb in the present or preterite form. in clauses with auxiliary verbs, they are the finite verbs and the main verb is treated as a subordinate clause. [ 222 ] for example, he has to go where only the auxiliary verb have is inflected for time and the main verb to go is in the infinitive, or in a complement clause such as i saw him leave , where the main verb is see , which is in a preterite form, and leave is in the infinitive. english also makes frequent use of constructions traditionally called phrasal verbs , verb phrases that are made up of a verb root and a preposition or particle that follows the verb. the phrase then functions as a single predicate. in terms of intonation the preposition is fused to the verb, but in writing it is written as a separate word. examples of phrasal verbs are to get up , to ask out , to back up , to give up , to get together , to hang out , to put up with , etc. the phrasal verb frequently has a highly idiomatic meaning that is more specialised and restricted than what can be simply extrapolated from the combination of verb and preposition complement (e.g. lay off meaning terminate someone's employment ). [ 223 ] in spite of the idiomatic meaning, some grammarians, including huddleston & pullum (2002 :274), do not consider this type of construction to form a syntactic constituent and hence refrain from using the term "phrasal verb". instead, they consider the construction simply to be a verb with a prepositional phrase as its syntactic complement, i.e. he woke up in the morning and he ran up in the mountains are syntactically equivalent. the function of adverbs is to modify the action or event described by the verb by providing additional information about the manner in which it occurs. [ 191 ] many adverbs are derived from adjectives by appending the suffix -ly . for example, in the phrase the woman walked quickly , the adverb quickly is derived in this way from the adjective quick . some commonly used adjectives have irregular adverbial forms, such as good , which has the adverbial form well . modern english syntax language is moderately analytic . [ 224 ] it has developed features such as modal verbs and word order as resources for conveying meaning. auxiliary verbs mark constructions such as questions, negative polarity, the passive voice and progressive aspect . english word order has moved from the germanic verb-second (v2) word order to being almost exclusively subject–verb–object (svo). [ 225 ] the combination of svo order and use of auxiliary verbs often creates clusters of two or more verbs at the centre of the sentence, such as he had hoped to try to open it . in most sentences, english only marks grammatical relations through word order. [ 226 ] the subject constituent precedes the verb and the object constituent follows it. the example below demonstrates how the grammatical roles of each constituent are marked only by the position relative to the verb: an exception is found in sentences where one of the constituents is a pronoun, in which case it is doubly marked, both by word order and by case inflection, where the subject pronoun precedes the verb and takes the subjective case form, and the object pronoun follows the verb and takes the objective case form. [ 227 ] the example below demonstrates this double marking in a sentence where both object and subject are represented with a third person singular masculine pronoun: indirect objects (io) of ditransitive verbs can be placed either as the first object in a double object construction (s v io o), such as i gave jane the book or in a prepositional phrase, such as i gave the book to jane . [ 228 ] in english a sentence may be composed of one or more clauses, that may, in turn, be composed of one or more phrases (e.g. noun phrases, verb phrases, and prepositional phrases). a clause is built around a verb and includes its constituents, such as any nps and pps. within a sentence, there is always at least one main clause (or matrix clause) whereas other clauses are subordinate to a main clause. subordinate clauses may function as arguments of the verb in the main clause. for example, in the phrase i think (that) you are lying , the main clause is headed by the verb think , the subject is i , but the object of the phrase is the subordinate clause (that) you are lying . the subordinating conjunction that shows that the clause that follows is a subordinate clause, but it is often omitted. [ 229 ] relative clauses are clauses that function as a modifier or specifier to some constituent in the main clause: for example, in the sentence i saw the letter that you received today , the relative clause that you received today specifies the meaning of the word letter , the object of the main clause. relative clauses can be introduced by the pronouns who , whose , whom , and which as well as by that (which can also be omitted.) [ 230 ] in contrast to many other germanic languages there are no major differences between word order in main and subordinate clauses. [ 231 ] english syntax relies on auxiliary verbs for many functions including the expression of tense, aspect, and mood. auxiliary verbs form main clauses, and the main verbs function as heads of a subordinate clause of the auxiliary verb. for example, in the sentence the dog did not find its bone , the clause find its bone is the complement of the negated verb did not . subject–auxiliary inversion is used in many constructions, including focus, negation, and interrogative constructions. the verb do can be used as an auxiliary even in simple declarative sentences, where it usually serves to add emphasis, as in "i did shut the fridge." however, in the negated and inverted clauses referred to above, it is used because the rules of english syntax permit these constructions only when an auxiliary is present. modern english does not allow the addition of the negating adverb not to an ordinary finite lexical verb, as in *i know not —it can only be added to an auxiliary (or copular ) verb, hence if there is no other auxiliary present when negation is required, the auxiliary do is used, to produce a form like i do not ( don't ) know. the same applies in clauses requiring inversion, including most questions—inversion must involve the subject and an auxiliary verb, so it is not possible to say *know you him? ; grammatical rules require do you know him? [ 232 ] negation is done with the adverb not , which precedes the main verb and follows an auxiliary verb. a contracted form of not -n't can be used as an enclitic attaching to auxiliary verbs and to the copula verb to be . just as with questions, many negative constructions require the negation to occur with do -support, thus in modern english i don't know him is the correct answer to the question do you know him? , but not *i know him not , although this construction may be found in older english. [ 233 ] passive constructions also use auxiliary verbs. a passive construction rephrases an active construction in such a way that the object of the active phrase becomes the subject of the passive phrase, and the subject of the active phrase is either omitted or demoted to a role as an oblique argument introduced in a prepositional phrase. they are formed by using the past participle either with the auxiliary verb to be or to get , although not all varieties of english allow the use of passives with get . for example, putting the sentence she sees him into the passive becomes he is s een ( by her ), or he gets seen ( by her ). [ 234 ] both yes–no questions and wh -questions in english are mostly formed using subject–auxiliary inversion ( am i going tomorrow? , where can we eat? ), which may require do -support ( do you like her? , where did he go? ). in most cases, interrogative words ( wh -words; e.g. what , who , where , when , why , how ) appear in a fronted position . for example, in the question what did you see? , the word what appears as the first constituent despite being the grammatical object of the sentence. (when the wh -word is the subject or forms part of the subject, no inversion occurs: who saw the cat? .) prepositional phrases can also be fronted when they are the questions theme, e.g. to whose house did you go last night? . the personal interrogative pronoun who is the only interrogative pronoun to still show inflection for case, with the variant whom serving as the objective case form, although this form may be going out of use in many contexts. [ 235 ] while english is a subject-prominent language, at the discourse level it tends to use a topic-comment structure, where the known information (topic) precedes the new information (comment). because of the strict svo syntax, the topic of a sentence generally has to be the grammatical subject of the sentence. in cases where the topic is not the grammatical subject of the sentence, it is often promoted to subject position through syntactic means. one way of doing this is through a passive construction, the girl was stung by the bee . another way is through a cleft sentence where the main clause is demoted to be a complement clause of a copula sentence with a dummy subject such as it or there , e.g. it was the girl that the bee stung , there was a girl who was stung by a bee . [ 236 ] dummy subjects are also used in constructions where there is no grammatical subject such as with impersonal verbs (e.g., it is raining ) or in existential clauses ( there are many cars on the street ). through the use of these complex sentence constructions with informationally vacuous subjects, english is able to maintain both a topic-comment sentence structure and a svo syntax. focus constructions emphasise a particular piece of new or salient information within a sentence, generally through allocating the main sentence level stress on the focal constituent. for example, the girl was stung by a bee (emphasising it was a bee and not, for example, a wasp that stung her), or the girl was stung by a bee (contrasting with another possibility, for example that it was the boy). [ 237 ] topic and focus can also be established through syntactic dislocation, either preposing or postposing the item to be focused on relative to the main clause. for example, that girl over there, she was stung by a bee , emphasises the girl by preposition, but a similar effect could be achieved by postposition, she was stung by a bee, that girl over there , where reference to the girl is established as an afterthought. [ 238 ] cohesion between sentences is achieved through the use of deictic pronouns as anaphora (e.g. that is exactly what i mean where that refers to some fact known to both interlocutors, or then used to locate the time of a narrated event relative to the time of a previously narrated event). [ 239 ] discourse markers such as oh , so , or well , also signal the progression of ideas between sentences and help to create cohesion. discourse markers are often the first constituents in sentences. discourse markers are also used for stance taking in which speakers position themselves in a specific attitude towards what is being said, for example, no way is that true! (the idiomatic marker no way! expressing disbelief), or boy! i'm hungry (the marker boy expressing emphasis). while discourse markers are particularly characteristic of informal and spoken registers of english, they are also used in written and formal registers. [ 240 ] it is generally stated that english has around 170,000 words, or 220,000 if obsolete words are counted; this estimate is based on the last full edition of the oxford english dictionary from 1989. [ 241 ] over half of these words are nouns, a quarter adjectives, and a seventh verbs. there is one count that puts the english vocabulary at about 1 million words—but that count presumably includes words such as latin species names , scientific terminology , botanical terms , prefixed and suffixed words, jargon , foreign words of extremely limited english use, and technical acronyms . [ 242 ] due to its status as an international language, english adopts foreign words quickly and borrows vocabulary from many other sources. early studies of english vocabulary by lexicographers , the scholars who formally study vocabulary, compile dictionaries, or both, were impeded by a lack of comprehensive data on actual vocabulary in use from good-quality linguistic corpora , [ 243 ] collections of actual written texts and spoken passages. many statements published before the end of the 20th century about the growth of english vocabulary over time, the dates of first use of various words in english, and the sources of english vocabulary will have to be corrected as new computerised analyses of linguistic corpus data become available. [ 242 ] [ 244 ] english forms new words from existing words or roots in its vocabulary through a variety of processes. one of the most productive processes in english is conversion, [ 245 ] using a word with a different grammatical role, for example using a noun as a verb or a verb as a noun. another productive word-formation process is nominal compounding, [ 242 ] [ 244 ] producing compound words such as babysitter or ice cream or homesick . [ 245 ] a process more common in old english than in modern english, but still productive in modern english, is the use of derivational suffixes ( -hood , -ness , -ing , -ility ) to derive new words from existing words (especially those of germanic origin) or stems (especially for words of latin or greek origin ). formation of new words, called neologisms , based on greek and/or latin roots (for example television or optometry ) is a highly productive process in english and in most modern european languages, so much so that it is often difficult to determine in which language a neologism originated. for this reason, american lexicographer philip gove attributed many such words to the " international scientific vocabulary " (isv) when compiling webster's third new international dictionary (1961). another active word-formation process in english is the creation of acronyms , [ 246 ] words formed by pronouncing abbreviations of longer phrases as single words, e.g. nato , laser , scuba . english, besides forming new words from existing words and their roots, also borrows words from other languages. this borrowing is commonplace in many world languages, but english has been especially open to borrowing of foreign words throughout the last 1,000 years. [ 248 ] nevertheless, most of the core vocabulary and the most common words in english are still west germanic. [ 249 ] [ 250 ] the english words first learned by children as they learn to speak are mainly germanic words from old english . [ 242 ] it is not possible to speak or write english without germanic words, but it is possible to write or speak many sentences in english without foreign loanwords. [ 251 ] but one of the consequences of long language contact between french and english in all stages of their development is that the vocabulary of english has a very high percentage of "latinate" words (derived from french, especially, and also from other romance languages and latin). french words from various periods of the development of french now make up one-third of the vocabulary of english. [ 252 ] linguist anthony lacoudre estimated that over 40,000 english words are of french origin and may be understood without orthographical change by french speakers. [ 253 ] words of old norse origin have entered the english language primarily from the contact between old norse and old english during colonisation of eastern and northern england . many of these words are part of english core vocabulary, such as egg and knife . [ 254 ] english has also borrowed many words directly from latin, the ancestor of the romance languages, during all stages of its development. [ 244 ] [ 242 ] many of these words had earlier been borrowed into latin from greek. latin or greek are still highly productive sources of stems used to form vocabulary of subjects learned in higher education such as the sciences, philosophy, and mathematics. [ 255 ] english continues to gain new loanwords and calques ("loan translations") from languages all over the world, and words from languages other than the ancestral anglo-saxon language make up about 60% of the vocabulary of english. [ 256 ] english has formal and informal speech registers ; informal registers, including child-directed speech, tend to be made up predominantly of words of anglo-saxon origin, while the percentage of vocabulary that is of latinate origin is higher in legal, scientific, and academic texts. [ 257 ] [ 258 ] english has had a strong influence on the vocabulary of other languages. [ 252 ] [ 259 ] the influence of english comes from such factors as opinion leaders in other countries knowing the english language, the role of english as a world lingua franca , and the large number of books and films that are translated from english into other languages. [ 260 ] that pervasive use of english leads to a conclusion in many places that english is an especially suitable language for expressing new ideas or describing new technologies. among varieties of english, it is especially american english that influences other languages. [ 261 ] some languages, such as chinese, write words borrowed from english mostly as calques , while others, such as japanese, readily take in english loanwords written in sound-indicating script. [ 262 ] dubbed films and television programmes are an especially fruitful source of english influence on languages in europe. [ 262 ] since the ninth century, english has been written in a latin alphabet (also called roman alphabet). earlier old english texts in anglo-saxon runes are only short inscriptions. the great majority of literary works in old english that survive to today are written in the roman alphabet. [ 42 ] the modern english alphabet contains 26 letters of the latin script : a , b , c , d , e , f , g , h , i , j , k , l , m , n , o , p , q , r , s , t , u , v , w , x , y , z (which also have capital forms: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, z). the spelling system, or orthography , of english is multi-layered and complex, with elements of french, latin, and greek spelling on top of the native germanic system. [ 263 ] further complications have arisen through sound changes with which the orthography has not kept pace. [ 57 ] compared to european languages for which official organisations have promoted spelling reforms, english has spelling that is a less consistent indicator of pronunciation, and standard spellings of words that are more difficult to guess from knowing how a word is pronounced. [ 264 ] there are also systematic spelling differences between british and american english . these situations have prompted proposals for spelling reform in english . [ 265 ] although letters and speech sounds do not have a one-to-one correspondence in standard english spelling, spelling rules that take into account syllable structure, phonetic changes in derived words, and word accent are reliable for most english words. [ 266 ] moreover, standard english spelling shows etymological relationships between related words that would be obscured by a closer correspondence between pronunciation and spelling—for example, the words photograph , photography , and photographic , [ 266 ] or the words electricity and electrical . while few scholars agree with chomsky and halle (1968) that conventional english orthography is "near-optimal", [ 263 ] there is a rationale for current english spelling patterns. [ 267 ] the standard orthography of english is the most widely used writing system in the world. [ 268 ] standard english spelling is based on a graphomorphemic segmentation of words into written clues of what meaningful units make up each word. [ 269 ] readers of english can generally rely on the correspondence between spelling and pronunciation to be fairly regular for letters or digraphs used to spell consonant sounds. the letters b , d , f , h , j , k , l , m , n , p , r , s , t , v , w , y , z represent, respectively, the phonemes /b, d, f, h, dʒ, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, j, z/ . the letters c and g normally represent /k/ and /ɡ/ , but there is also a soft c pronounced /s/ , and a soft g pronounced /dʒ/ . the differences in the pronunciations of the letters c and g are often signalled by the following letters in standard english spelling. digraphs used to represent phonemes and phoneme sequences include ch for /tʃ/ , sh for /ʃ/ , th for /θ/ or /ð/ , ng for /ŋ/ , qu for /kw/ , and ph for /f/ in greek-derived words. the single letter x is generally pronounced as /z/ in word-initial position and as /ks/ otherwise. there are exceptions to these generalisations, often the result of loanwords being spelled according to the spelling patterns of their languages of origin [ 266 ] or residues of proposals by scholars in the early period of modern english to follow the spelling patterns of latin for english words of germanic origin. [ 270 ] for the vowel sounds of the english language, however, correspondences between spelling and pronunciation are more irregular. there are many more vowel phonemes in english than there are single vowel letters ( a , e , i , o , u , y , and very rarely w ). as a result, some " long vowels " are often indicated by combinations of letters (like the oa in boat , the ow in how , and the ay in stay ), or the historically based silent e (as in note and cake ). [ 267 ] the consequence of this complex orthographic history is that learning to read and write can be challenging in english. it can take longer for school pupils to become independently fluent readers of english than of many other languages, including italian, spanish, and german. [ 271 ] nonetheless, there is an advantage for learners of english reading in learning the specific sound-symbol regularities that occur in the standard english spellings of commonly used words. [ 266 ] such instruction greatly reduces the risk of children experiencing reading difficulties in english. [ 272 ] [ 273 ] making primary school teachers more aware of the primacy of morpheme representation in english may help learners learn more efficiently to read and write english. [ 274 ] english writing also includes a system of punctuation marks that is similar to those used in most alphabetic languages around the world. the purpose of punctuation is to mark meaningful grammatical relationships in sentences to aid readers in understanding a text and to indicate features important for reading a text aloud. [ 275 ] dialectologists identify many english dialects , which usually refer to regional varieties that differ from each other in terms of patterns of grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation. the pronunciation of particular areas distinguishes dialects as separate regional accents . the major native dialects of english are often divided by linguists into the two extremely general categories of british english (bre) and north american english (nae). [ 276 ] there also exists a third common major grouping of english varieties: southern hemisphere english, the most prominent being australian and new zealand english . the fact that english has been spoken in england for 1,500 years explains why england has a great wealth of regional dialects. [ 277 ] within the united kingdom, received pronunciation (rp), an educated accent associated originally with the south east of england , has been traditionally used as a broadcast standard and is considered the most prestigious of british accents. the spread of rp (also known as bbc english) through the media has caused many traditional dialects of rural england to recede, as youths adopt the traits of the prestige variety instead of traits from local dialects. at the time of the 1950–61 survey of english dialects , grammar and vocabulary differed across the country, but a process of lexical attrition has led most of this variation to disappear. [ 278 ] nonetheless, this attrition has mostly affected dialectal variation in grammar and vocabulary. in fact, only 3% of the english population actually speak rp, the remainder speaking in regional accents and dialects with varying degrees of rp influence. [ 279 ] there is also variability within rp, particularly along class lines between upper and middle-class rp speakers and between native rp speakers and speakers who adopt rp later in life. [ 280 ] within britain, there is also considerable variation along lines of social class; some traits, though exceedingly common, are nonetheless considered "non-standard" and associated with lower-class speakers and identities. an example of this is h -dropping , which was historically a feature of lower-class london english, particularly cockney, and can now be heard in the local accents of most parts of england. however, it remains largely absent in broadcasting and among the upper crust of british society. [ 281 ] english in england can be divided into four major dialect regions: south east english, south west english (also known as west country english ), midlands english and northern english . within each of these regions, several local dialects exist: within the northern region, there is a division between the yorkshire dialects , the geordie dialect (spoken around newcastle , in northumbria ) and the lancashire dialects, which include the urban subdialects of manchester ( mancunian ) and liverpool ( scouse ). having been the centre of danish occupation during the viking invasions of england, northern english dialects, particularly the yorkshire dialect, retain norse features not found in other english varieties. [ 282 ] since the 15th century, south east england varieties have centred on london, which has been the centre from which dialectal innovations have spread to other dialects. in london, the cockney dialect was traditionally used by the lower classes, and it was long a socially stigmatised variety. the spread of cockney features across the south east led the media to talk of estuary english as a new dialect, but the notion was criticised by many linguists on the grounds that london had been influencing neighbouring regions throughout history. [ 283 ] [ 284 ] [ 285 ] traits that have spread from london in recent decades include the use of intrusive r ( drawing is pronounced drawring /ˈdrɔːrɪŋ/ ), t -glottalisation ( potter is pronounced with a glottal stop as po'er /ˈpɒʔə/ ) and th -fronting , or the pronunciation of th- as /f/ ( thanks pronounced fanks ) or /v/ ( bother pronounced bover ). [ 286 ] scots is today considered a separate language from english, but it has its origins in early northern middle english [ 287 ] and developed and changed during its history with influence from other sources, particularly scottish gaelic and old norse. scots itself has a number of regional dialects. in addition to scots, scottish english comprises the varieties of standard english spoken in scotland; most varieties are northern english accents, with some influence from scots. [ 288 ] in ireland , various forms of english have been spoken since the norman invasions of the 11th century. in county wexford and in the area surrounding dublin , two extinct dialects known as forth and bargy and fingallian developed as offshoots from early middle english and were spoken until the 19th century. modern irish english , however, has its roots in english colonisation in the 17th century. today irish english is divided into ulster english , the northern ireland dialect with strong influence from scots, and various dialects of the republic of ireland. like scottish and most north american accents, almost all irish accents preserve the rhoticity which has been lost in the dialects influenced by rp. [ 22 ] [ 289 ] due to the relatively strong degree of mixing, mutual accommodation, and koinéization that occurred during the colonial period, north american english has traditionally been perceived as relatively homogeneous, at least in comparison with british dialects. however, modern scholars have strongly opposed this notion, arguing that north american english shows a great deal of phonetic, lexical, and geographic variability. this becomes all the more apparent considering social, ethnolinguistic, and regional varieties such as african american english , chicano english , cajun english , or newfoundland english . [ 290 ] american accent variation is increasing at the regional level and decreasing at the very local level, [ 291 ] though most americans still speak within a phonological continuum of similar accents, [ 292 ] known collectively as general american english (ga), with differences hardly noticed even among americans themselves, including midland and western american english . [ 293 ] [ 294 ] [ 295 ] in most american and canadian english dialects, rhoticity (or r -fullness) is dominant, with non-rhoticity (or r -dropping) being associated with lower prestige and social class, especially since the end of world war ii . this contrasts with the situation in england, where non-rhoticity has become the standard. [ 296 ] separate from general american english are american dialects with clearly distinct sound systems that have developed over time, including southern american english , the english of the coastal northeastern united states —including new york city english and eastern new england english —and african-american vernacular english ; all of these, aside from certain subdialects of the american south, were historically non-rhotic. canadian english varieties, except for those of the atlantic provinces and perhaps quebec , are generally considered to fall under the general american english continuum, although they often show raising of the vowels / aɪ / and / aʊ / before voiceless consonants and have distinct norms for writing and pronunciation as well. [ 297 ] atlantic canadian english , notably distinct from standard canadian english , [ 298 ] comprises maritime english (or maritimer english) and newfoundland english . it was mostly influenced by british and irish english , irish and scottish gaelic , and some acadian french . [ 299 ] regions such as miramichi and cape breton island have a wide variety of phrases and words not spoken outside of their respective regions. in southern american english , the most populous american "accent group" outside of general american english, [ 300 ] rhoticity now strongly prevails, replacing the region's historical non-rhotic prestige . [ 301 ] [ 302 ] [ 303 ] southern accents are colloquially described as a "drawl" or "twang", [ 304 ] being recognised most readily by the southern vowel shift initiated by glide-deleting in the /aɪ/ vowel (e.g. pronouncing spy almost like spa ), the "southern breaking" of several front pure vowels into a gliding vowel or even two syllables (e.g. pronouncing the word "press" almost like "pray-us"), [ 305 ] the pin–pen merger , and other distinctive phonological, grammatical, and lexical features, many of which are actually recent developments of the 19th century or later. [ 306 ] spoken primarily by working- and middle-class african americans , african-american vernacular english (aave) is also largely non-rhotic and likely originated among enslaved africans and african americans influenced primarily by the non-rhotic, non-standard older southern dialects . a minority of linguists, [ 307 ] contrarily, propose that aave mostly traces back to african languages spoken by the slaves who had to develop a pidgin or creole english to communicate with slaves of other ethnic and linguistic origins. [ 308 ] aave's important commonalities with southern accents suggest it developed into a highly coherent and homogeneous variety in the 19th or early 20th century. aave is commonly stigmatised in north america as a form of "broken" or "uneducated" english, as are white southern accents, but linguists today recognise both as fully developed varieties of english with their own norms shared by large speech communities. [ 309 ] [ 310 ] since 1788, english has been spoken in oceania , and australian english has developed as the first language of the vast majority of the inhabitants of the australian continent, its standard accent being general australian . the english of neighbouring new zealand has to a lesser degree become an influential standard variety of the language. [ 311 ] australian and new zealand english are each other's closest relatives with few differentiating characteristics, followed by south african english and the english of south east england, all of which have similarly non-rhotic accents, aside from some accents in the south island of new zealand. australian and new zealand english stand out for their innovative vowels: many short vowels are fronted or raised, whereas many long vowels have diphthongised. australian english also has a contrast between long and short vowels, not found in most other varieties. australian english grammar aligns closely with british and american english; like american english, collective plural subjects take on a singular verb (as in the government is rather than are ). [ 312 ] [ 313 ] new zealand english uses front vowels that are often even higher than in australian english. [ 314 ] [ 315 ] [ 316 ] the first significant exposure of the philippines to the english language occurred in 1762 when the british occupied manila during the seven years' war , but this was a brief episode that had no lasting influence. english later became more important and widespread during american rule between 1898 and 1946 and remains an official language of the philippines. today, the use of english is ubiquitous in the philippines, being found on street signs and marquees, in government documents and forms, in courtrooms, in the media and entertainment industries, in the business sector, and in various other aspects of daily life. [ 317 ] one particularly prominent form of english usage in the country is found in everyday speech: most filipinos from manila use or, at the very least, have been exposed to taglish , a form of code-switching between tagalog and english. [ 318 ] a similar code-switching method is used by urban native speakers of bisayan languages under the name of bislish . english is spoken widely in southern africa and is an official or co-official language in several of the region's countries. in south africa , english has been spoken since 1820, co-existing with afrikaans and various african languages such as the khoe and bantu languages . today, about nine percent of the south african population speaks south african english (sae) as a first language. sae is a non-rhotic variety that tends to follow rp as a norm. it is one of the few non-rhotic english varieties that lack intrusive r. the second-language varieties of south africa differ based on the native languages of their speakers. [ 319 ] most phonological differences from rp are in the vowels. [ 320 ] consonant differences include the tendency to pronounce /p, t, t͡ʃ, k/ without aspiration (e.g. pin pronounced [pɪn] rather than as [pʰɪn] as in most other varieties), while r is often pronounced as a flap [ɾ] instead of as the more common fricative. [ 321 ] nigerian english is a variety of english spoken in nigeria . [ 322 ] it has traditionally been based on british english, but in recent years, because of influence from the united states, some words of american english origin have made it into nigerian english. additionally, some new words and collocations have emerged from the variety out of a need to express concepts specific to the culture of the nation (e.g. senior wife ). over 150 million nigerians speak english. [ 323 ] several varieties of english are also spoken in the caribbean islands that were colonial possessions of britain, including jamaica, the leeward and windward islands and trinidad and tobago , barbados , the cayman islands and belize . each of these areas is home both to a local variety of english and a local english-based creole, combining english and african languages. the most prominent varieties are jamaican english and jamaican creole . in central america, english-based creoles are spoken on the caribbean coasts of nicaragua and panama. [ 324 ] locals are often fluent in both the local english variety and the local creole languages, and code-switching between them is frequent. indeed, a way to conceptualise the relationship between such creole and standard varieties is to view them as a spectrum of language registers in which the most creole-like forms serve as the "basilect" and the most rp-like forms serve as the "acrolect", the most formal register. [ 325 ] most caribbean varieties are based on british english and consequently, most are non-rhotic, except for formal styles of jamaican english which are often rhotic. jamaican english differs from rp in its vowel inventory, which has a distinction between long and short vowels rather than tense and lax vowels as in standard english. the diphthongs /ei/ and /ou/ are monophthongs [eː] and [oː] or even the reverse diphthongs [ie] and [uo] (e.g. bay and boat pronounced [bʲeː] and [bʷoːt] ). often word-final consonant clusters are simplified so that "child" is pronounced [t͡ʃail] and "wind" [win] . [ 326 ] [ 327 ] [ 328 ] as a historical legacy, indian english tends to take rp as its ideal, and how well this ideal is realised in an individual's speech reflects class distinctions among indian english speakers. indian english accents are marked by the pronunciation of phonemes such as /t/ and /d/ (often pronounced with retroflex articulation as [ʈ] and [ɖ] ) and the replacement of /θ/ and /ð/ with dentals [t̪] and [d̪] . sometimes indian english speakers may also use spelling-based pronunciations where the silent ⟨h⟩ found in words such as ghost is pronounced as an indian voiced aspirated stop [ɡʱ] . [ 329 ] non-native english speakers may pronounce words differently due to having not fully mastered english pronunciation . this can happen either because they apply the speech rules of their mother tongue to english ("interference") or through implementing strategies similar to those used in first language acquisition . [ 330 ] they may create innovative pronunciations for english sounds, not found in the speaker's first language. [ 330 ]

original file (2,213 × 2,951 pixels, file size: 355 kb, mime type: image/jpeg ) on one side is a drawing of a woman's head, inscribed with "i am aineta". there are also the names of nine men, in the nominative case - identified by the bm as possibly aineta's admirers. click on a date/time to view the file as it appeared at that time. more than 100 pages use this file. the following list shows the first 100 pages that use this file only. a full list is available. this file contains additional information, probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. if the file has been modified from its original state, some details may not fully reflect the modified file.

the aineta aryballos is an ancient greek aryballos (a small, spherical flask or vase), made between approximately 625 and 570 bce in the city of corinth in southern greece . approximately 6.35 centimetres (2.50 in) in both height and diameter, it was intended to contain perfumed oil or unguent , and is likely to have been owned by a high-class courtesan ( hetaira ) by the name of aineta, who may be portrayed in a drawing on its handle. the vase's illegal sale to the british museum in 1865 led to the prosecution of its seller, the athenian professor and art dealer athanasios rhousopoulos , and exposed his widespread involvement in antiquities crime. the vase is inscribed with a portrait, generally agreed to be that of a woman and probably that of aineta, who is named in the inscription on the vase. below the portrait are the names of nine men, usually taken to be aineta's admirers or lovers. the aineta aryballos is likely to have been found in a grave, probably that of aineta. according to rhousopoulos, it was discovered in corinth around 1852. in 1877, panagiotis efstratiadis , the ephor general of antiquities in charge of the greek archaeological service , had rhousopoulos fined for selling the vase in contravention of greek law. writing in 2012 for the center for hellenic studies , yannis galanakis called the case "a milestone in the trafficking of greek antiquities", in that it represented a relatively rare successful use of state power against the illegal trade in ancient greek artefacts. [ 2 ] the aineta aryballos is made from yellowish clay. [ 3 ] it is a small vase, with a spherical body and a disc-shaped neck, connected by a handle. [ 4 ] the entire aryballos is approximately 6.35 centimetres (2.50 in) in height [ 1 ] and diameter. its base is flat, allowing it to stand on its own. the opening of the jar is approximately 8 millimetres (0.31 in) in diameter, within a mouth approximately 4.2–4.8 centimetres (1.7–1.9 in) in diameter. the handle is 3.0 centimetres (1.2 in) wide and 2.5 centimetres (0.98 in) tall, and tapers slightly towards the bottom. the vase itself was made on a potter's wheel in two pieces – the globular body and the disc-shaped neck – which were subsequently joined to each other and to the handle. [ 4 ] the athenian art dealer athanasios rhousopoulos , a professor at the university of athens , [ 5 ] made the first scholarly publication of the aryballos in 1862, in which he described it as "rather rough, but diligently cleaned". [ 3 ] in his initial publication, rhousopoulos said that it resembled a quince ; [ 4 ] later, he would describe it as "the size of an apple". [ 6 ] aryballoi were small, spherical flasks or vases, typically used to store small amounts of perfumed oil or unguent . [ 7 ] rhousopoulos believed that the vase may have been a gift from her lovers to a high-class courtesan ( hetaira ) named aineta, or perhaps deposited as a grave good in her tomb. [ a ] in support of this latter hypothesis, rhousopoulos suggested that the vase's excellent state of preservation, as well as the lack of any post-manufacture inscriptions (such as the kalos inscription common on attic vases) indicated that it had never been used. [ 8 ] matthias steinhart and eckhard wirbelauer wrote in 2000 that it is universally considered to have been a gift of some nature; [ 9 ] rudolf wachter concurred in 2001 with rhousopoulos's assessment that the vase was probably a "love-gift". [ 10 ] the body and mouth of the vase are decorated with rosettes . rhousopoulos considered the mouth, with its flower-like motif centred on the opening, as the finest part of the vase, writing "here we trace a fully greek taste". he contrasted this with the decoration of the vase body, where, he judged, "we immediately find ourselves in unknown regions of asia: magnificent, ... but strange and exotic". [ 11 ] [ b ] the vase was made in the city of corinth , in southern greece. [ 13 ] on the basis of its decoration, rhousopoulos dated the vase to the 30th olympiad (660–656 bce), which would have made the aineta aryballos the oldest-known inscribed corinthian vase, [ 14 ] and place it in the ceramic period known as middle protocorinthian ii. [ 15 ] its date has since been disputed: in his 1931 work on corinthian pottery, humfry payne dated it to approximately 625 bce on the basis of the letter-forms used in the inscription, an assessment endorsed by lilian hamilton jeffery in 1961. [ 16 ] in 1979, fritz lorber argued that payne's date was too early: he discussed the vase among those of the early corinthian period (620/615–595/590 bce), [ 17 ] and wrote that the letter-forms show features, such as the serpentine form of the letter iota , characteristic of sixth-century inscriptions. [ 12 ] darrell a. amyx suggested in 1988 that it most likely dates to the middle corinthian period (595/590–570 bce), a view upheld by wachter. [ 18 ] the handle of the vase is inscribed with a drawing of the head of a woman, with a list of nine men's names on the vase body below it, [ 19 ] [ c ] separated from each other and the portrait by three dividing lines. [ 21 ] similar female portraits are common on other corinthian vases of the type. [ 22 ] all of the names, as well as the drawing, were inscribed at the time of the vase's manufacture. [ 8 ] the writing uses the corinthian alphabet . [ 23 ] descending from the mouth of the woman's portrait is an inscription, aineta emi ( αἰνέτα ἐμί ): the word emi [ d ] means "i am", and aineta is a name, meaning "the famous one" or "the praised one". [ 24 ] it is generally considered to be a woman's name, [ e ] probably of a hetaira , as it fits the common tendency for hetairai to have self-descriptive "speaking names". [ 26 ] scholars debate whether aineta is in the nominative or the genitive case : if the former, the inscription translates as "i am aineta"; if the latter, it means "i am aineta's". in support of the nominative reading, wachter and margherita guarducci point out that the words are written descending from the portrait's mouth, as if representing the portrait's speech. [ 27 ] this is the earliest known example in greek pottery of a speech-inscription; they became reasonably common in the sixth century bce. [ 28 ] in 1976, carlo gallavotti [ it ] argued that the portrait was that of a man's head, that the name was that of ainetas, a male dancer, and that the other names were members of his troupe, including a musician named menneas. [ 29 ] this view has generally been rejected. [ 30 ] payne had earlier dismissed the "ainetas" hypothesis on the grounds that the name is otherwise unknown in greek. [ 31 ] aineta is sometimes considered to be a pseudonym or the name of a fictional hetaira , though wachter considers it most likely to be real. [ 26 ] the name meneas (or menneas ) comes first in the list and is written slightly larger and more boldly than the others, and so seems to have been given particular prominence. [ 10 ] rhousopoulos interpreted the female face as a drawing of the goddess aphrodite . [ 8 ] most subsequent assessments have considered it more likely to be a portrait of aineta. [ 24 ] katerina volioti and maria papageorgiou have associated the portrait with similar depictions connected to the coming of age of upper-class women. [ 32 ] in a 1942 article, majorie milne considered that the presence of multiple male names showed a "co-operative spirit" between aineta's admirers, and contrasted the vase with a pyxis showing three female names that she suggested were those of hetairai . [ 33 ] wachter has described the list of names on the aineta aryballos as good evidence for corinthian prosopography and onomastics at the time of the vase's use. [ 10 ] the vase was first mentioned in scholarship by rhousopoulos, in an 1862 article in the journal of the german archaeological institute at rome [ de ] . [ 34 ] according to rhousopoulos's publication, the vase had been discovered around 1852 in corinth, and had "come into [his] possession" a few years later. [ 4 ] rhousopoulos was a part of the illegal trade in ancient artefacts excavated surreptitiously and without official permission. [ 35 ] in the early 1870s, he boasted to the oxford professor george rolleston that he was able to call upon "all the athens grave-diggers [ f ] who dig for tombs throughout attica". [ 38 ] though his activities had not yet attracted official notice, [ 6 ] nikolaos papazarkadas has written that rhousopoulos "was heavily involved in dubious transactions involving illegally-excavated antiquities". [ 35 ] the main law governing antiquities was the archaeological law of 22 may [ o.s. 10 may] 1834, [ g ] which galanakis has characterised as "loosely interpreted and even more loosely enforced". [ 40 ] under the 1834 law, private excavators – often referred to as "grave-robbers" [ 41 ] – required the permission of the ephor general to excavate, but the ephor general was obliged to grant that authorisation if the excavation took place on private land and had the landowner's consent. [ 42 ] furthermore, antiquities discovered in such excavations were considered the joint property of the state and the private excavators, [ 43 ] and would be shared between the landowners and the excavators. [ 44 ] such artefacts could be sold freely overseas, provided that their owners secured the judgement of a state committee of three experts that the object was "useless" to greek museums. [ 45 ] in 1865, panagiotis efstratiadis , the ephor general in charge of the greek archaeological service , [ h ] wrote in his diary of the size and richness of rhousopoulos's antiquities collection, marking the first time that rhousopoulos's activities had come to official attention. [ 6 ] rhousopoulos sold the aryballos to the british museum for 1,000 drachmae in 1865, [ 2 ] [ i ] via charles merlin , a british banker and diplomat resident in athens who often acted as an intermediary for antiquities purchases. charles newton , the museum's keeper of greek and roman antiquities, had previously selected the object for purchase, and subsequently received it from merlin. [ 48 ] rhousopoulos made the sale without securing the required permission from the state committee, but defended himself in the newspaper elpis on 16 february [ o.s. 4 february] 1867, arguing that the aryballos was "of no artistic value, the size of an apple, only valued for 25 drachmae". [ 6 ] [ i ] efstratiadis, meanwhile, denounced rhousopoulos as a "university professor; antiquities looter". [ 49 ] efstratiadis's ability to respond to rhousopoulos's breach of the law was limited: the state had few financial, human or legal resources to address the illegal excavation and trade of antiquities, and his superiors in government had little political will to do so. [ 50 ] he also needed to maintain good relations with athens's art dealers, who undertook more excavations in this period than either the greek archaeological service or the closely aligned archaeological society of athens , and usually offered to sell the artefacts they uncovered to the state. [ 51 ] furthermore, rhousopoulos was periodically a member of the appraising committee of three, and often acted as a consultant to it, further limiting efstratiadis's ability to use the state's archaeological apparatus against him. [ 6 ] rhousopoulos was fined 1,000 drachmae (the same amount for which he had sold the aryballos) later in 1867 for exporting antiquities without the ephor general's permission. his actions were condemned by the minister for education and religious affairs, who oversaw the archaeological service, [ 52 ] and by the archaeological society of athens, which expelled him at some point in the 1870s. [ 53 ] rhousopoulos subsequently endeavoured to keep his antiquities dealing outside the knowledge and scrutiny of the state. [ 52 ] writing for the center for hellenic studies in 2012, galanakis called the case over the aryballos "a milestone in the trafficking of greek antiquities", in that it represented a rare successful prosecution for the unauthorised export of an ancient artefact under the 1834 law. [ 2 ]

an aryballos ( greek : ἀρύβαλλος; plural aryballoi ) was a small spherical or globular flask with a narrow neck used in ancient greece . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] it was used to contain perfume or oil , and is often depicted in vase paintings being used by athletes during bathing. in these depictions, the vessel is at times attached by a strap to the athlete's wrist or hung by a strap from a peg on the wall. the shape of the aryballos originally came from the oinochoe of the geometric period of the 9th century bce, a globe-shaped wine jar. by the proto-corinthian period of the following century, it had attained its definitive shape, going from spherical to ovoid to conical, and finally back to spherical. this definitive form has a wide, flat mouth, and a single small handle. some later variations have bell-shaped mouths, a second handle, and/or a flat base. potters also created inventive shapes for aryballoi. the austrian commission of the corpus vasorum antiquorum is investigating the material properties of these vessels using computed tomography and optical 3d acquisition techniques. [ 3 ]

37°54′19″n 22°52′49″e ﻿ / ﻿ 37.9053455°n 22.8801924°e ﻿ / 37.9053455; 22.8801924 corinth ( / ˈ k ɒr ɪ n θ / korr -inth ; ancient greek : κόρινθος kórinthos ; doric greek : ϙόρινθος qórinthos ; latin : corinthus ) was a city-state ( polis ) on the isthmus of corinth , the narrow stretch of land that joins the peloponnese peninsula to the mainland of greece , roughly halfway between athens and sparta . the modern city of corinth is located approximately 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) northeast of the ancient ruins. since 1896, systematic archaeological investigations of the corinth excavations by the american school of classical studies at athens have revealed large parts of the ancient city, and recent excavations conducted by the greek ministry of culture have brought to light important new facets of antiquity. for christians , corinth is well known from the two letters from paul the apostle in the new testament , the first epistle to the corinthians and the second epistle to the corinthians . corinth is also mentioned in the acts of the apostles as part of paul the apostle 's missionary travels. in addition, the second book of pausanias ' description of greece is devoted to corinth. ancient corinth was one of the largest and most important cities of greece, with a population of 90,000 in 400 bc. [ 1 ] the romans demolished corinth in 146 bc, built a new city in its place in 44 bc, and later made it the provincial capital of greece. neolithic pottery suggests that the site of corinth was occupied from at least as early as 6500 bc, and continually occupied into the early bronze age , [ 2 ] when, it has been suggested, the settlement acted as a centre of trade. [ 3 ] however, there is a huge drop in ceramic remains during the early helladic ii phase and only sparse ceramic remains in the ehiii [ clarification needed ] and mh [ clarification needed ] phases; thus, it appears that the area was very sparsely inhabited in the period immediately before the mycenaean period . there was a settlement on the coast near lechaion which traded across the corinthian gulf; the site of corinth itself was likely not heavily occupied again until around 900 bc, when it is believed that the dorians settled there. [ 4 ] according to corinthian myth as reported by pausanias , the city was founded by corinthos , a descendant of the god zeus . [ 5 ] however, other myths hold that it was founded by the goddess ephyra , a daughter of the titan oceanus , thus the ancient name of the city (also ephyra). it seems likely that corinth was also the site of a bronze age mycenaean palace-city, like mycenae , tiryns , or pylos . according to myth, sisyphus was the founder of a race of ancient kings at corinth. it was also in corinth that jason , the leader of the argonauts , abandoned medea . [ 6 ] the catalogue of ships in the iliad lists the corinthians amid the contingent fighting in the trojan war under the leadership of agamemnon . in a corinthian myth recounted to pausanias in the 2nd century ad, [ 7 ] briareus, one of the hecatonchires , was the arbitrator in a dispute between poseidon and helios , respectively gods of the sea and the sun. his verdict was that the isthmus of corinth , the area closest to the sea, belonged to poseidon, and the acropolis of corinth ( acrocorinth ), closest to the sky, belonged to helios. [ 8 ] the upper peirene spring is located within the walls of the acropolis. pausanias (2.5.1) says that it was put there by asopus , repaying sisyphus for information about the abduction of aegina by zeus. [ 9 ] according to legend, the winged horse pegasus drank at the spring, [ 10 ] and was captured and tamed by the corinthian hero bellerophon . corinth had been a backwater in greece in the 8th century bc. [ 11 ] the bacchiadae ( βακχιάδαι , bakkhiádai ) were a tightly-knit doric clan and the ruling kinship group of archaic corinth in the 8th and 7th centuries bc, a period of expanding corinthian cultural power. in 747 bc (a traditional date), an aristocracy ousted the bacchiadai prytaneis and reinstituted the kingship, about the time the kingdom of lydia (the endonymic basileia sfard ) was at its greatest, coinciding with the ascent of basileus meles, king of lydia. the bacchiadae, numbering perhaps a couple of hundred adult males, took power from the last king telestes (from the house of sisyphos ) in corinth. [ 12 ] the bacchiads dispensed with kingship and ruled as a group, governing the city by annually electing a prytanis (who held the kingly position [ 13 ] for his brief term), [ 14 ] probably a council (though none is specifically documented in the scant literary materials), and a polemarchos to head the army. during bacchiad rule from 747 to 650 bc, corinth became a unified state. large scale public buildings and monuments were constructed at this time. in 733 bc, corinth established colonies at corcyra and syracuse . by 730 bc, corinth emerged as a highly advanced greek city with at least 5,000 people. [ 15 ] aristotle tells the story of philolaus of corinth, a bacchiad who was a lawgiver at thebes. he became the lover of diocles , the winner of the olympic games. they both lived for the rest of their lives in thebes. their tombs were built near one another and philolaus' tomb points toward the corinthian country, while diocles' faces away. [ 16 ] in 657 bc, polemarch cypselus obtained an oracle from delphi which he interpreted to mean that he should rule the city. [ 17 ] he seized power and exiled the bacchiadae. [ 18 ] cypselus ( κύψελος , kýpselos ) was the first tyrant of corinth in the 7th century bc. from 658–628 bc, he removed the bacchiad aristocracy from power and ruled for three decades. he built temples to apollo and poseidon in 650 bc. cypselus was the son of eëtion and a disfigured woman named labda . he was a member of the bacchiad kin and usurped the power in archaic matriarchal right of his mother. according to herodotus , the bacchiadae heard two prophecies from the delphic oracle that the son of eëtion would overthrow their dynasty, and they planned to kill the baby once he was born. however, the newborn smiled at each of the men sent to kill him, and none of them could bear to strike the blow. labda then hid the baby in a chest, [ 19 ] and the men could not find him once they had composed themselves and returned to kill him. (compare the infancy of perseus .) the ivory chest of cypselus was richly worked and adorned with gold . it was a votive offering at olympia , where pausanias gave it a minute description in his 2nd century ad travel guide. [ 20 ] cypselus grew up and fulfilled the prophecy. corinth had been involved in wars with argos and corcyra , and the corinthians were unhappy with their rulers. cypselus was polemarch at the time (around 657 bc), the archon in charge of the military, and he used his influence with the soldiers to expel the king. he also expelled his other enemies, but allowed them to set up colonies in northwestern greece. he also increased trade with the colonies in italy and sicily . he was a popular ruler and, unlike many later tyrants, he did not need a bodyguard and died a natural death. aristotle reports that "cypselus of corinth had made a vow that if he became master of the city, he would offer to zeus the entire property of the corinthians. accordingly, he commanded them to make a return of their possessions." [ 21 ] the city sent forth colonists to found new settlements in the 7th century bc, under the rule of cypselus (r. 657–627 bc) and his son periander (r. 627–587 bc). those settlements were epidamnus (modern day durrës , albania ), syracuse , ambracia , corcyra (modern day town of corfu ), and anactorium . periander also founded apollonia in illyria (modern day fier , albania) and potidaea (in chalcidice ). corinth was also one of the nine greek sponsor-cities to found the colony of naukratis in ancient egypt , founded to accommodate the increasing trade volume between the greek world and pharaonic egypt during the reign of pharaoh psammetichus i of the 26th dynasty . he ruled for thirty years and was succeeded as tyrant by his son periander in 627 bc. [ 22 ] the treasury that cypselus built at delphi was apparently still standing in the time of herodotus, and the chest of cypselus was seen by pausanias at olympia in the 2nd century ad. periander brought corcyra to order in 600 bc. periander was considered one of the seven wise men of greece . [ 23 ] during his reign, the first corinthian coins were struck. he was the first to attempt to cut across the isthmus to create a seaway between the corinthian and the saronic gulfs. he abandoned the venture due to the extreme technical difficulties that he met, but he created the diolkos instead (a stone-built overland ramp). the era of the cypselids was corinth's golden age, and ended with periander's nephew psammetichus (corinthian tyrant) [ de ] , named after the hellenophile egyptian pharaoh psammetichus i (see above). periander killed his wife melissa. his son lycophron found out and shunned him, and periander exiled the son to corcyra . [ 24 ] periander later wanted lycophron to replace him as ruler of corinth, and convinced him to come home to corinth on the condition that periander go to corcyra. the corcyreans heard about this and killed lycophron to keep away periander. [ 25 ] [ 26 ] 581 bc: periander's nephew and successor was assassinated, ending the tyranny. 581 bc: the isthmian games were established by leading families. 570 bc: the inhabitants started to use silver coins called 'colts' or 'foals'. 550 bc: construction of the temple of apollo at corinth (early third quarter of the 6th century bc). [ 27 ] 525 bc: corinth formed a conciliatory alliance with sparta against argos. 519 bc: corinth mediated between athens and thebes . around 500 bc: athenians and corinthians entreated spartans not to harm athens by restoring the tyrant. [ 28 ] just before the classical period, according to thucydides , the corinthians developed the trireme which became the standard warship of the mediterranean until the late roman period. corinth fought the first naval battle on record against the hellenic city of corcyra . [ 29 ] the corinthians were also known for their wealth due to their strategic location on the isthmus, through which all land traffic had to pass en route to the peloponnese, including messengers and traders. [ 30 ] in classical times , corinth rivaled athens and thebes in wealth, based on the isthmian traffic and trade. until the mid-6th century, corinth was a major exporter of black-figure pottery to city-states around the greek world, later losing their market to athenian artisans. in classical times and earlier, corinth had a temple of aphrodite , the goddess of love, employing some thousand hetairas (temple prostitutes) (see also temple prostitution in corinth ). the city was renowned for these temple prostitutes, who served the wealthy merchants and the powerful officials who frequented the city. lais , the most famous hetaira, was said to charge tremendous fees for her extraordinary favours. referring to the city's exorbitant luxuries, horace is quoted as saying: " non licet omnibus adire corinthum " ("not everyone is able to go to corinth"). [ 31 ] corinth was also the host of the isthmian games . during this era, corinthians developed the corinthian order , the third main style of classical architecture after the doric and the ionic . the corinthian order was the most complicated of the three, showing the city's wealth and the luxurious lifestyle, while the doric order evoked the rigorous simplicity of the spartans, and the ionic was a harmonious balance between these two following the cosmopolitan philosophy of ionians like the athenians. the city had two main ports: to the west on the corinthian gulf lay lechaion , which connected the city to its western colonies (greek: apoikiai ) and magna graecia , while to the east on the saronic gulf the port of kenchreai served the ships coming from athens, ionia , cyprus and the levant . both ports had docks for the city's large navy. in 491 bc, corinth mediated between syracuse and gela in sicily. during the years 481–480 bc, the conference at the isthmus of corinth (following conferences at sparta) established the hellenic league, which allied under the spartans to fight the war against persia . the city was a major participant in the persian wars, sending 400 soldiers to defend thermopylae [ 32 ] and supplying forty warships for the battle of salamis under adeimantos and 5,000 hoplites with their characteristic corinthian helmets [ citation needed ] ) in the following battle of plataea . the greeks obtained the surrender of theban collaborators with the persians. pausanias took them to corinth where they were put to death. [ 33 ] following the battle of thermopylae and the subsequent battle of artemisium , which resulted in the captures of euboea , boeotia , and attica , [ 34 ] the greco-persian wars were at a point where now most of mainland greece to the north of the isthmus of corinth had been overrun. [ 35 ] herodotus, who was believed to dislike the corinthians, mentions that they were considered the second best fighters after the athenians. [ 36 ] in 458 bc, corinth was defeated by athens at megara . in 435 bc, corinth and its colony corcyra went to war over epidamnus . [ 37 ] in 433 bc, athens allied with corcyra against corinth. [ 38 ] the corinthian war against the corcyrans was the largest naval battle between greek city states until that time. [ 39 ] in 431 bc, one of the factors leading to the peloponnesian war was the dispute between corinth and athens over corcyra, which possibly stemmed from the traditional trade rivalry between the two cities or, as thucydides relates – the dispute over the colony of epidamnus. [ 40 ] the syracusans sent envoys to corinth and sparta to seek allies against athenian invasion . [ 41 ] the corinthians "voted at once to aid [the syracusans] heart and soul". [ 42 ] the corinthians also sent a group to lacedaemon to rouse spartan assistance. after a convincing speech from the athenian renegade alcibiades , the spartans agreed to send troops to aid the sicilians. [ 42 ] in 404 bc, sparta refused to destroy athens, angering the corinthians. corinth joined argos , boeotia , and athens against sparta in the corinthian war . [ citation needed ] [ clarification needed ] demosthenes later used this history in a plea for magnanimous statecraft, noting that the athenians of yesteryear had had good reason to hate the corinthians and thebans for their conduct during the peloponnesian war, [ 43 ] yet they bore no malice whatever. [ 44 ] in 395 bc, after the end of the peloponnesian war, corinth and thebes, dissatisfied with the hegemony of their spartan allies, moved to support athens against sparta in the corinthian war . [ 45 ] [ 46 ] as an example of facing danger with knowledge, aristotle used the example of the argives who were forced to confront the spartans in the battle at the long walls of corinth in 392 bc. [ 47 ] in 379 bc, corinth, switching back to the peloponnesian league , joined sparta in an attempt to defeat thebes and eventually take over athens. [ citation needed ] [ clarification needed ] in 366 bc, the athenian assembly ordered chares to occupy the athenian ally and install a democratic government. this failed when corinth, phlius and epidaurus allied with boeotia . demosthenes recounts how athens had fought the spartans in a great battle near corinth. the city decided not to harbor the defeated athenian troops, but instead sent heralds to the spartans. but the corinthian heralds opened their gates to the defeated athenians and saved them. demosthenes notes that they “chose along with you, who had been engaged in battle, to suffer whatever might betide, rather than without you to enjoy a safety that involved no danger.” [ 48 ] these conflicts further weakened the city-states of the peloponnese and set the stage for the conquests of philip ii of macedon . demosthenes warned that philip's military force exceeded that of athens and thus they must develop a tactical advantage. he noted the importance of a citizen army as opposed to a mercenary force, citing the mercenaries of corinth who fought alongside citizens and defeated the spartans. [ 49 ] in 338 bc, after having defeated athens and its allies, philip ii created the league of corinth to unite greece (included corinth and macedonia) in the war against persia. philip was named hegemon of the league. in the spring of 337 bc, the second congress of corinth established the common peace . by 332 bc, alexander the great was in control of greece, as hegemon. during the hellenistic period , corinth, like many other greece cities, never quite had autonomy. under the successors of alexander the great , greece was contested ground, and corinth was occasionally the battleground for contests between the antigonids , based in macedonia , and other hellenistic powers. in 308 bc, the city was captured from the antigonids by ptolemy i, who claimed to come as a liberator of greece from the antigonids. however, the city was recaptured by demetrius in 304 bc. [ 50 ] corinth remained under antigonid control for half a century. after 280 bc, it was ruled by the faithful governor craterus ; but, in 253/2 bc, his son alexander of corinth , moved by ptolemaic subsidies, resolved to challenge the macedonian supremacy and seek independence as a tyrant. he was probably poisoned in 247 bc; after his death, the macedonian king antigonus ii gonatas retook the city in the winter of 245/44 bc. the macedonian rule was short-lived. in 243 bc, aratus of sicyon , using a surprise attack, captured the fortress of acrocorinth and convinced the citizenship to join the achaean league . thanks to an alliance agreement with aratus, the macedonians recovered corinth once again in 224 bc; but, after the roman intervention in 197 bc, the city was permanently brought into the achaean league. under the leadership of philopoemen , the achaeans went on to take control of the entire peloponnesus and made corinth the capital of their confederation. [ 51 ] in 146 bc, rome declared war on the achaean league. a series of roman victories culminated in the battle of corinth , after which the army of lucius mummius besieged, captured, and burned the city. mummius killed all the men and sold the women and children into slavery; he was subsequently given the cognomen achaicus as the conqueror of the achaean league. [ 52 ] there is archeological evidence of some minimal habitation in the years afterwards, but corinth remained largely deserted until julius caesar refounded the city as colonia laus iulia corinthiensis ("colony of corinth in honour of julius") in 44 bc, shortly before his assassination . at this time, an amphitheatre was built. ( 37°54′35″n 22°53′31″e ﻿ / ﻿ 37.909824°n 22.892078°e ﻿ / 37.909824; 22.892078 ﻿ ( corinth (corinth) ) ) under the romans, corinth was rebuilt as a major city in southern greece or achaia . it had a large [ 53 ] mixed population of romans, greeks, and jews . the city was an important locus for activities of the roman imperial cult , and both temple e [ 54 ] and the julian basilica [ 55 ] have been suggested as locations of imperial cult activity. corinth is mentioned many times in the new testament , largely in connection with paul the apostle's mission there , testifying to the success of caesar's refounding of the city. traditionally, the church of corinth is believed to have been founded by paul, making it an apostolic see . the apostle paul first visited the city in ad 49 or 50, when gallio , the brother of seneca , was proconsul of achaia. [ 56 ] paul resided here for eighteen months (see acts 18:11 ). here he first became acquainted with priscilla and aquila , with whom he later traveled. they worked here together as tentmakers (from which is derived the modern christian concept of tentmaking ), and regularly attended the synagogue . in ad 51/52, gallio presided over the trial of the apostle paul in corinth . silas and timothy rejoined paul here, having last seen him in berea ( acts 18:5 ). acts 18:6 suggests that jewish refusal to accept his preaching here led paul to resolve no longer to speak in the synagogues where he travelled: "from now on i will go to the gentiles". [ 57 ] however, on his arrival in ephesus ( acts 18:19 ), the narrative records that paul went to the synagogue to preach. paul wrote at least two epistles to the christian church, the first epistle to the corinthians (written from ephesus) and the second epistle to the corinthians (written from macedonia ). the first epistle occasionally reflects the conflict between the thriving christian church and the surrounding community. some scholars believe that paul visited corinth for an intermediate "painful visit" (see 2 corinthians 2:1 ) between the first and second epistles. after writing the second epistle, he stayed in corinth for about three months [ 58 ] in the late winter, and there wrote his epistle to the romans . [ 59 ] based on clues within the corinthian epistles themselves, some scholars have concluded that paul wrote possibly as many as four epistles to the church at corinth. [ 60 ] only two are contained within the christian canon ( first and second epistles to the corinthians ); the other two letters are lost. (the lost letters would probably represent the very first letter that paul wrote to the corinthians and the third one, and so the first and second letters of the canon would be the second and the fourth if four were written.) many scholars think that the third one (known as the "letter of the tears"; see 2 cor 2:4) is included inside the canonical second epistle to the corinthians (it would be chapters 10–13). this letter is not to be confused with the so-called " third epistle to the corinthians ", which is a pseudepigraphical letter written many years after the death of paul. there are speculations from bruce winter that the jewish access to their own food in corinth was disallowed after paul's departure. by this theory, paul had instructed christian gentiles to maintain jewish access to food according to their dietary laws. this speculation is contested by rudolph who argues that there is no evidence to support this theory. he instead argues that paul had desired the gentile christians to remain assimilated within their gentile communities and not adopt jewish dietary procedures. [ 61 ] the city was largely destroyed in the earthquakes of ad 365 and ad 375, followed by alaric 's invasion in 396. the city was rebuilt after these disasters on a monumental scale, but covered a much smaller area than previously. four churches were located in the city proper, another on the citadel of the acrocorinth , and a monumental basilica at the port of lechaion . [ 62 ] during the reign of emperor justinian i (527–565), a large stone wall was erected from the saronic to the corinthian gulfs, protecting the city and the peloponnese peninsula from the barbarian invasions from the north. the stone wall was about six miles (10 km) long and was named hexamilion ("six-miles"). corinth declined from the 6th century on, and may even have fallen to barbarian invaders in the early 7th century. the main settlement moved from the lower city to the acrocorinth. despite its becoming the capital of the theme of hellas and, after c. 800, of the theme of the peloponnese , it was not until the 9th century that the city began to recover, reaching its apogee in the 11th and 12th centuries, when it was the site of a flourishing silk industry . [ 62 ] in november 856, an earthquake in corinth killed an estimated 45,000. [ 63 ] the wealth of the city attracted the attention of the italo-normans under roger ii of sicily , who plundered it in 1147, carrying off many captives, most notably silk weavers. the city never fully recovered from the norman sack. [ 62 ] following the sack of constantinople by the fourth crusade , a group of crusaders under the french knights william of champlitte and geoffrey of villehardouin carried out the conquest of the peloponnese. the corinthians resisted the frankish conquest from their stronghold in acrocorinth, under the command of leo sgouros , from 1205 until 1210. in 1208 leo sgouros killed himself by riding off the top of acrocorinth, but resistance continued for two more years. finally, in 1210 the fortress fell to the crusaders, and corinth became a full part of the principality of achaea , governed by the villehardouins from their capital in andravida in elis . corinth was the last significant town of achaea on its northern borders with another crusader state, the duchy of athens . the ottomans captured the city in 1395. the byzantines of the despotate of the morea recaptured it in 1403, and the despot theodore ii palaiologos , restored the hexamilion wall across the isthmus of corinth in 1415. in 1458, five years after the final fall of constantinople , the turks of the ottoman empire conquered the city and its mighty castle. the ottomans renamed it gördüs ( گوردوس ) and made it a sanjak (district) centre within the rumelia eyalet . [ 64 ] the venetians captured the city in 1687 during the morean war , and it remained under venetian control until the ottomans retook the city in 1715. corinth was the capital of the mora eyalet in 1715–1731 and then again a sanjak capital until 1821. during the greek war of independence , 1821–1830 the city was contested by the ottoman forces. at that time, the christian albanian tribes living to the north of the isthmus of corinth attacked the acropolis of the city. they were around 2000 musketeers against the ottoman troops. [ 65 ] the city was officially liberated in 1832 after the treaty of london . in 1833, the site was considered among the candidates for the new capital city of the recently founded kingdom of greece , due to its historical significance and strategic position. nafplio was chosen initially, then athens . the acrocorinth ( ἀκροκόρινθος , akrokórinthos ), the acropolis of ancient corinth, is a monolithic rock that was continuously occupied from archaic times to the early 19th century. the city's archaic acropolis, already an easily defensible position due to its geomorphology, was further heavily fortified during the byzantine empire as it became the seat of the strategos of the thema of hellas. later it was a fortress of the franks after the fourth crusade , the venetians and the ottoman turks. with its secure water supply, acrocorinth's fortress was used as the last line of defense in southern greece because it commanded the isthmus of corinth , repelling foes from entry into the peloponnesian peninsula. three circuit walls formed the man-made defense of the hill. the highest peak on the site was home to a temple to aphrodite which was christianized as a church, and then became a mosque . [ 66 ] the american school began excavations on it in 1929. currently, acrocorinth is one of the most important medieval castle sites of greece. corinth had two harbours: lechaeum on the corinthian gulf and cenchreae on the saronic gulf . lechaeum was the principal port, connected to the city with a set of long walls of about 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) length, and was the main trading station for italy and sicily, where there were many corinthian colonies, while cenchreae served the commerce with the eastern mediterranean. ships could be transported between the two harbours by means of the diolkos constructed by the tyrant periander . the corinth excavations by the american school of classical studies at athens began in 1896 and have continued with little interruption until today. restricted by the modern village of ancient corinth, which directly overlies the ancient city, the main focus of school investigations has been on the area surrounding the mid-6th century b.c. temple of apollo. this dominating monument has been one of the only features of the site visible since antiquity. archaeologists such as bert hodge hill , carl blegen , william dinsmoor sr. , oscar broneer , and rhys carpenter worked to uncover much of the site before wwii. [ 67 ] since then, under the leadership of directors henry robinson (1959–1965), charles k. williams ii (1965–1997) and guy d. r. sanders (1997–present), excavation has clarified the archaeological history of the city. investigations have revealed remains extending from the early neolithic period (6500-5750 b.c.) through to early modern times. archaeological work has also been done outside the immediate area of the village center including at the sanctuary of demeter and kore on the slopes of acrocorinth , in the potters’ quarter, at the sites of the sanctuary of asklepios and the kenchreian gate basilica. [ 68 ] current investigations focus on the area of the panayia field, located to the southeast of the forum. school excavations and projects affiliated to the ascsa have also intensively explored the wider area of the corinthia including the surrounding settlements of korakou, kenchreai and isthmia . finds from these works are housed in the archaeological museum of ancient corinth . in 1858, the village surrounding the ruins of ancient corinth was destroyed by an earthquake, leading to the establishment of new corinth 3 km (1.9 mi) ne of the ancient city.

an unguent is a soothing preparation spread on wounds , burns , rashes , abrasions or other topical injuries (i.e. damage to the skin). it is similar to an ointment , though typically an unguent is oilier and less viscous . it is usually delivered as a semi-solid paste spread on the skin, and it is often oily in order to suspend the medication or other active ingredients . during the victorian era , the use of the unguent macassar oil on the hair became so popular that antimacassars were invented to prevent damage to furniture. [ 1 ] various preparations of mercurochrome unguent are occasionally used as adjunct therapy in the treatment of furunculosis , and palliative relief of kaposi sarcomas , although mercurials should only be used in extreme cases due to high toxicity and severe hypersensitivity or idiosyncratic reactions. it was also used by the egyptians to help soothe their skin from the dry heat. this analgesic -related article is a stub . you can help wikipedia by expanding it .

a hetaira ( / h ɪ ˈ t aɪ r ə / ; ancient greek : ἑταίρα , lit. ' companion ' ; pl. . ἑταῖραι hetairai , / h ɪ ˈ t aɪ r aɪ / ), latinized as hetaera ( / h ɪ ˈ t ɪ r ə / pl. hetaerae / h ɪ ˈ t ɪ r iː / ), was a type of highly educated female companion in ancient greece who served as an artist, entertainer, and conversationalist. historians have often classed them as courtesans , but the extent to which they were sex workers is a matter of dispute. custom excluded the wives and daughters of athenian citizens from the symposium , but this prohibition did not extend to hetairai , who were often foreign-born and could be well-versed in arts, philosophy, and culture. other female entertainers might appear in the otherwise male domain, but hetairai actively participated in conversations, including intellectual and literary discourse. traditionally, historians of ancient greece have distinguished between hetairai and pornai , another class of prostitute. in contrast to pornai, who provided sex for numerous clients in brothels or on the street, hetairai were thought to have had only a few men as clients at any one time, to have had long-term relationships with them, and to have provided companionship and intellectual stimulation as well as sex. [ 1 ] for instance, charles seltman wrote in 1953 that "hetaeras were certainly in a very different class, often highly educated women". [ 2 ] more recently, historians have questioned the extent to which there was really a distinction between hetairai and pornai. the second edition of the oxford classical dictionary , for instance, held that hetaira was a euphemism for any kind of prostitute. [ 3 ] this position is supported by konstantinos kapparis, who holds that apollodorus ' famous tripartite division of the types of women in the speech against neaera ("we have courtesans for pleasure, concubines for the daily tending of the body, and wives in order to beget legitimate children and have a trustworthy guardian of what is at home." [ 4 ] ) classes all prostitutes together, under the term hetairai . [ 5 ] [ 6 ] a third position, advanced by rebecca futo kennedy, suggests that hetairai "were not prostitutes or even courtesans". [ 7 ] instead, she argues, hetairai were "elite women ... who participated in sympotic and luxury culture", [ 8 ] just as hetairoi —the masculine form of the word—was used to refer to groups of elite men at symposia. [ 7 ] even when the term hetaira was used to refer to a specific class of prostitute, though, scholars disagree on what precisely the line of demarcation was. kurke emphasises that hetairai veiled the fact that they were selling sex through the language of gift-exchange, while pornai explicitly commodified sex. [ 10 ] leslie kurke claims that both hetairai and pornai could be slaves or free, and might or might not work for a pimp . [ 10 ] kapparis says that hetairai were high-class prostitutes, and cites dover as pointing to the long-term nature of hetairai's relationships with individual men. [ 11 ] miner disagrees with kurke, claiming that hetairai were always free, not slaves. [ 12 ] along with sexual services, women described as hetairai rather than pornai seem to have often been educated, and have provided companionship. [ 13 ] according to kurke, the concept of hetairism was a product of the symposium , where hetairai were permitted as sexually available companions of the male party-goers. [ 14 ] in athenaeus ' deipnosophistai , hetairai are described as providing "flattering and skillful conversation": something which is, elsewhere in classical literature, seen as a significant part of the hetaira's role. [ 15 ] particularly, "witty" and "refined" were seen as attributes which distinguished hetairai from common pornai. [ 16 ] hetairai are likely to have been musically educated, too. [ 17 ] free hetairai could become very wealthy, and control their own finances. however, their careers could be short, and if they did not earn enough to support themselves, they might have been forced to resort to working in brothels , or working as pimps, in order to ensure a continued income as they got older. [ 18 ] scholars also disagree about the identification of hetaeras in ancient greek vase painting. attributes which might identify hetaeras include nudity, involvement in erotic activity, and the presence of money bags. working with textiles, depiction on kylixes, and being named in inscriptions have all also been used as evidence that women depicted on vases are hetaeras. however, the reliability of all of these indications has been questioned: for instance nudity in the context of athletics, wedding rituals, or supplication does not necessarily relate to sex work. some scholars have argued that it is impossible to distinguish hetaeras from other kinds of women, or that some depictions of women are intentionally ambiguous. [ 19 ]

the british museum is a public museum dedicated to human history , art and culture located in the bloomsbury area of london. its permanent collection of eight million works is the largest in the world. [ 3 ] it documents the story of human culture from its beginnings to the present. [ a ] established in 1753, the british museum was the first public national museum. [ 4 ] in 2023, the museum received 5,820,860 visitors, an increase of 42% from 2022. it was the most popular attraction in the united kingdom according to the association of leading visitor attractions (alva). [ 2 ] at its beginning, the museum was largely based on the collections of the anglo-irish physician and scientist sir hans sloane . [ 5 ] it opened to the public in 1759, in montagu house , on the site of the current building. the museum's expansion over the following 250 years was largely a result of british colonisation and resulted in the creation of several branch institutions, or independent spin-offs, the first being the natural history museum in 1881. some of its best-known acquisitions, such as the greek elgin marbles and the egyptian rosetta stone , are subject to long-term disputes and repatriation claims. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] in 1973, the british library act 1972 [ 8 ] detached the library department from the british museum, but it continued to host the now separated british library in the same reading room and building as the museum until 1997. the museum is a non-departmental public body sponsored by the department for culture, media and sport . like all uk national museums, it charges no admission fee except for loan exhibitions. [ 9 ] although today principally a museum of cultural art objects and antiquities , the british museum was founded as a "universal museum". its foundations lie in the will of the anglo-irish physician and naturalist sir hans sloane (1660–1753), a london-based doctor and scientist from ulster . during the course of his lifetime, and particularly after he married the widow of a wealthy jamaican planter, [ 10 ] sloane gathered a large collection of curiosities , and not wishing to see his collection broken up after death, he bequeathed it to king george ii , for the nation, for a sum of £20,000 (equivalent to £3,846,793 in 2023) to be paid to his heirs by parliament [ 11 ] —intentionally far less than the estimated value of the artefacts, contemporarily estimated at £50,000 (equivalent to £9,616,983 in 2023) or more according to some sources, and up to £80,000 (equivalent to £15,387,173 in 2023) or more by others. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] at that time, sloane's collection consisted of around 71,000 objects of all kinds [ 14 ] including some 40,000 printed books, 7,000 manuscripts, extensive natural history specimens including 337 volumes of dried plants, prints and drawings including those by albrecht dürer and antiquities from sudan , egypt , greece , rome , the ancient near and far east and the americas . [ 15 ] on 7 june 1753, king george ii gave his royal assent to the act of parliament which established the british museum. [ b ] the british museum act 1753 also added two other libraries to the sloane collection, namely the cottonian library , assembled by sir robert cotton , dating back to elizabethan times, and the harleian library , the collection of the earls of oxford . they were joined in 1757 by the "old royal library", now the royal manuscripts , assembled by various british monarchs . together these four "foundation collections" included many of the most treasured books now in the british library [ 17 ] including the lindisfarne gospels and the sole surviving manuscript of beowulf . [ c ] the british museum was the first of a new kind of museum – national, belonging to neither church nor king, freely open to the public and aiming to collect everything. sloane's collection, while including a vast miscellany of objects, tended to reflect his scientific interests. [ 18 ] the addition of the cotton and harley manuscripts introduced a literary and antiquarian element, and meant that the british museum now became both national museum and library. [ 19 ] the body of trustees decided on a converted 17th-century mansion, montagu house , as a location for the museum, which it bought from the montagu family for £20,000. the trustees rejected buckingham house, which was later converted into the present day buckingham palace , on the grounds of cost and the unsuitability of its location. [ 20 ] [ d ] with the acquisition of montagu house, the first exhibition galleries and reading room for scholars opened on 15 january 1759. [ 21 ] at this time, the largest parts of collection were the library, which took up the majority of the rooms on the ground floor and the natural history objects, which took up an entire wing on the first floor . in 1763, the trustees of the british museum, under the influence of peter collinson and william watson , employed the former student of carl linnaeus , daniel solander , to reclassify the natural history collection according to the linnaean system , thereby making the museum a public centre of learning accessible to the full range of european natural historians. [ 22 ] in 1823, king george iv gave the king's library assembled by george iii, [ 23 ] and parliament gave the right to a copy of every book published in the country, thereby ensuring that the museum's library would expand indefinitely. during the few years after its foundation the british museum received several further gifts, including the thomason collection of civil war tracts and david garrick 's library of 1,000 printed plays. the predominance of natural history, books and manuscripts began to lessen when in 1772 the museum acquired for £8,410 its first significant antiquities in sir william hamilton 's "first" collection of greek vases . [ 24 ] from 1778, a display of objects from the south seas brought back from the round-the-world voyages of captain james cook and the travels of other explorers fascinated visitors with a glimpse of previously unknown lands. the bequest of a collection of books, engraved gems , coins, prints and drawings by clayton mordaunt cracherode in 1800 did much to raise the museum's reputation; but montagu house became increasingly crowded and decrepit and it was apparent that it would be unable to cope with further expansion. [ 25 ] the museum's first notable addition towards its collection of antiquities, since its foundation, was by sir william hamilton (1730–1803), british ambassador to naples , who sold his collection of greek and roman artefacts to the museum in 1784 together with a number of other antiquities and natural history specimens. a list of donations to the museum, dated 31 january 1784, refers to the hamilton bequest of a "colossal foot of an apollo in marble". it was one of two antiquities of hamilton's collection drawn for him by francesco progenie, a pupil of pietro fabris , who also contributed a number of drawings of mount vesuvius sent by hamilton to the royal society in london. in the early 19th century the foundations for the extensive collection of sculpture began to be laid and greek, roman and egyptian artefacts dominated the antiquities displays. after the defeat of the french campaign in the battle of the nile , in 1801, the british museum acquired more egyptian sculptures and in 1802 king george iii presented the rosetta stone – key to the deciphering of hieroglyphs. [ 26 ] gifts and purchases from henry salt , british consul general in egypt, beginning with the colossal bust of ramesses ii in 1818, laid the foundations of the collection of egyptian monumental sculpture. [ 27 ] many greek sculptures followed, notably the first purpose-built exhibition space, the charles towneley collection , much of it roman sculpture, in 1805. in 1806, thomas bruce, 7th earl of elgin , ambassador to the ottoman empire from 1799 to 1803 removed the large collection of marble sculptures from the parthenon , on the acropolis in athens and transferred them to the uk. in 1816 these masterpieces of western art were acquired by the british museum by act of parliament and deposited in the museum thereafter. [ 28 ] the collections were supplemented by the bassae frieze from phigaleia , greece in 1815. the ancient near eastern collection also had its beginnings in 1825 with the purchase of assyrian and babylonian antiquities from mary mackintosh rich, the widow of assyriologist claudius james rich . [ 29 ] in 1802 a buildings committee was set up to plan for expansion of the museum, and further highlighted by the donation in 1822 of the king's library , personal library of king george iii's, comprising 65,000 volumes, 19,000 pamphlets , maps, charts and topographical drawings . [ 30 ] the neoclassical architect, sir robert smirke , was asked to draw up plans for an eastern extension to the museum "... for the reception of the royal library , and a picture gallery over it ..." [ 31 ] and put forward plans for today's quadrangular building, much of which can be seen today. the dilapidated old montagu house was demolished and work on the king's library gallery began in 1823. the extension, the east wing, was completed by 1831. however, following the founding of the national gallery , london in 1824, [ e ] the proposed picture gallery was no longer needed, and the space on the upper floor was given over to the natural history collections. [ 32 ] the first synopsis of the british museum was published in 1808. this described the contents of the museum, and the display of objects room by room, and updated editions were published every few years. as sir robert smirke 's grand neo-classical building gradually arose, the museum became a construction site. the king's library , on the ground floor of the east wing, was handed over in 1827, and was described as one of the finest rooms in london. although it was not fully open to the general public until 1857, special openings were arranged during the great exhibition of 1851. in 1840, the museum became involved in its first overseas excavations , charles fellows 's expedition to xanthos , in asia minor , whence came remains of the tombs of the rulers of ancient lycia , among them the nereid and payava monuments. in 1857, charles newton was to discover the 4th-century bc mausoleum of halikarnassos , one of the seven wonders of the ancient world . in the 1840s and 1850s the museum supported excavations in assyria by a.h. layard and others at sites such as nimrud and nineveh . of particular interest to curators was the eventual discovery of ashurbanipal 's great library of cuneiform tablets , which helped to make the museum a focus for assyrian studies . [ 33 ] sir thomas grenville (1755–1846), a trustee of the british museum from 1830, assembled a library of 20,240 volumes, which he left to the museum in his will. the books arrived in january 1847 in twenty-one horse-drawn vans. the only vacant space for this large library was a room originally intended for manuscripts, between the front entrance hall and the manuscript saloon. the books remained here until the british library moved to st pancras in 1998. the opening of the forecourt in 1852 marked the completion of robert smirke 's 1823 plan, but already adjustments were having to be made to cope with the unforeseen growth of the collections. infill galleries were constructed for assyrian sculptures and sydney smirke 's round reading room , with space for a million books, opened in 1857. because of continued pressure on space the decision was taken to move natural history to a new building in south kensington , which would later become the british museum of natural history . roughly contemporary with the construction of the new building was the career of a man sometimes called the "second founder" of the british museum, the italian librarian anthony panizzi . under his supervision, the british museum library (now part of the british library ) quintupled in size and became a well-organised institution worthy of being called a national library, the largest library in the world after the national library of paris . [ 19 ] the quadrangle at the centre of smirke's design proved to be a waste of valuable space and was filled at panizzi's request by a circular reading room of cast iron, designed by smirke's brother, sydney smirke. [ 34 ] until the mid-19th century, the museum's collections were relatively circumscribed but, in 1851, with the appointment to the staff of augustus wollaston franks to curate the collections, the museum began for the first time to collect british and european medieval antiquities, prehistory , branching out into asia and diversifying its holdings of ethnography . a real coup for the museum was the purchase in 1867, over french objections, of the duke of blacas 's wide-ranging and valuable collection of antiquities. overseas excavations continued and john turtle wood discovered the remains of the 4th century bc temple of artemis at ephesos , another wonder of the ancient world . [ 35 ] the natural history collections were an integral part of the british museum until their removal to the new british museum of natural history in 1887, nowadays the natural history museum in south kensington . with the departure and the completion of the new white wing (fronting montague street) in 1884, more space was available for antiquities and ethnography and the library could further expand. this was a time of innovation as electric lighting was introduced in the reading room and exhibition galleries. [ 36 ] the william burges collection of armoury was bequeathed to the museum in 1881. in 1882, the museum was involved in the establishment of the independent egypt exploration fund (now society) the first british body to carry out research in egypt. a bequest from miss emma turner in 1892 financed excavations in cyprus. in 1897 the death of the great collector and curator, a. w. franks , was followed by an immense bequest of 3,300 finger rings , 153 drinking vessels, 512 pieces of continental porcelain, 1,500 netsuke , 850 inro , over 30,000 bookplates and miscellaneous items of jewellery and plate, among them the oxus treasure . [ 37 ] in 1898 baron ferdinand de rothschild bequeathed the waddesdon bequest , the glittering contents from his new smoking room at waddesdon manor . this consisted of almost 300 pieces of objets d'art et de vertu which included exquisite examples of jewellery, plate, enamel, carvings, glass and maiolica , among them the holy thorn reliquary , probably created in the 1390s in paris for john, duke of berry . the collection was in the tradition of a schatzkammer such as those formed by the renaissance princes of europe. [ 38 ] baron ferdinand's will was most specific, and failure to observe the terms would make it void, the collection should be placed in a special room to be called the waddesdon bequest room separate and apart from the other contents of the museum and thenceforth for ever thereafter, keep the same in such room or in some other room to be substituted for it. [ 38 ] these terms are still observed, and the collection occupies room 2a. by the last years of the 19th century, the british museum's collections had increased to the extent that its building was no longer large enough. in 1895 the trustees purchased the 69 houses surrounding the museum with the intention of demolishing them and building around the west, north and east sides of the museum. the first stage was the construction of the northern wing beginning 1906. all the while, the collections kept growing. emil torday collected in central africa, aurel stein in central asia, d. g. hogarth , leonard woolley and t. e. lawrence excavated at carchemish . around this time, the american collector and philanthropist j. pierpont morgan donated a substantial number of objects to the museum, [ 39 ] including william greenwell 's collection of prehistoric artefacts from across europe which he had purchased for £10,000 in 1908. morgan had also acquired a major part of sir john evans 's coin collection, which was later sold to the museum by his son j. p. morgan jr. in 1915. in 1918, because of the threat of wartime bombing, some objects were evacuated via the london post office railway to holborn, the national library of wales (aberystwyth) and a country house near malvern . on the return of antiquities from wartime storage in 1919 some objects were found to have deteriorated. a conservation laboratory was set up in may 1920 and became a permanent department in 1931. it is today the oldest in continuous existence. [ 40 ] in 1923, the british museum welcomed over one million visitors. new mezzanine floors were constructed and book stacks rebuilt in an attempt to cope with the flood of books. in 1931, the art dealer sir joseph duveen offered funds to build a gallery for the parthenon sculptures . designed by the american architect john russell pope , it was completed in 1938. the appearance of the exhibition galleries began to change as dark victorian reds gave way to modern pastel shades. [ f ] following the retirement of george francis hill as director and principal librarian in 1936, he was succeeded by john forsdyke . as tensions with nazi germany developed and it appeared that war may be imminent forsdyke came to the view that with the likelihood of far worse air-raids than that experienced in world war i that the museum had to make preparations to remove its most valuable items to secure locations. following the munich crisis forsdyke ordered 3,300 no-nail boxes and stored them in the basement of duveen gallery. at the same time he began identifying and securing suitable locations. as a result, the museum was able to quickly commence relocating selected items on 24 august 1939, (a mere day after the home secretary advised them to do so), to secure basements, country houses , aldwych underground station and the national library of wales . [ 42 ] many items were relocated in early 1942 from their initial dispersal locations to a newly developed facility at westwood quarry in wiltshire . [ 42 ] the evacuation was timely, for in 1940 the duveen gallery was severely damaged by bombing. [ 43 ] meanwhile, prior to the war, the nazis had sent a researcher to the british museum for several years with the aim of "compiling an anti-semitic history of anglo-jewry". [ 44 ] after the war, the museum continued to collect from all countries and all centuries: among the most spectacular additions were the 2600 bc mesopotamian treasure from ur , discovered during leonard woolley 's 1922–34 excavations. gold, silver and garnet grave goods from the anglo-saxon ship burial at sutton hoo (1939) and late roman silver tableware from mildenhall , suffolk (1946). the immediate post-war years were taken up with the return of the collections from protection and the restoration of the museum after the blitz . work also began on restoring the damaged duveen gallery. in 1953, the museum celebrated its bicentenary . many changes followed: the first full-time in-house designer and publications officer were appointed in 1964, the friends organisation was set up in 1968, an education service established in 1970 and publishing house in 1973. in 1963, a new act of parliament introduced administrative reforms. it became easier to lend objects, the constitution of the board of trustees changed and the natural history museum became fully independent. by 1959 the coins and medals office suite, completely destroyed during the war, was rebuilt and re-opened, attention turned towards the gallery work with new tastes in design leading to the remodelling of robert smirke's classical and near eastern galleries. [ 45 ] in 1962 the duveen gallery was finally restored and the parthenon sculptures were moved back into it, once again at the heart of the museum. [ g ] by the 1970s, the museum was again expanding. more services for the public were introduced; visitor numbers soared, with the temporary exhibition "treasures of tutankhamun " in 1972, attracting 1,694,117 visitors, the most successful in british history. in the same year the act of parliament establishing the british library was passed, separating the collection of manuscripts and printed books from the british museum. this left the museum with antiquities; coins, medals and paper money; prints and drawings; and ethnography . a pressing problem was finding space for additions to the library which now required an extra 1 + 1 ⁄ 4 miles (2.0 km) of shelving each year. the government suggested a site at st pancras for the new british library but the books did not leave the museum until 1997. the departure of the british library to a new site at st pancras, finally achieved in 1998, provided the space needed for the books. it also created the opportunity to redevelop the vacant space in robert smirke's 19th-century central quadrangle into the queen elizabeth ii great court – the largest covered square in europe – which opened in 2000. the ethnography collections, which had been housed in the short-lived museum of mankind at 6 burlington gardens from 1970, were returned to new purpose-built galleries in the museum in 2000. the museum again readjusted its collecting policies as interest in "modern" objects: prints, drawings, medals and the decorative arts reawakened. ethnographical fieldwork was carried out in places as diverse as new guinea , madagascar , romania , guatemala and indonesia and there were excavations in the near east , egypt, sudan and the uk. the weston gallery of roman britain, opened in 1997, displayed a number of recently discovered hoards which demonstrated the richness of what had been considered an unimportant part of the roman empire. the museum turned increasingly towards private funds for buildings, acquisitions and other purposes. [ 47 ] in 2000, the british museum was awarded national heritage museum of the year . [ 48 ] today the museum no longer houses collections of natural history , and the books and manuscripts it once held now form part of the independent british library . the museum nevertheless preserves its universality in its collections of artefacts representing the cultures of the world, ancient and modern. the original 1753 collection has grown to over 13 million objects at the british museum, 70 million at the natural history museum and 150 million at the british library. the round reading room , which was designed by the architect sydney smirke , opened in 1857. for almost 150 years researchers came here to consult the museum's vast library. the reading room closed in 1997 when the national library (the british library) moved to a new building at st pancras . today it has been transformed into the walter and leonore annenberg centre. with the bookstacks in the central courtyard of the museum empty, the demolition for lord foster 's glass-roofed great court could begin. the great court, opened in 2000, while undoubtedly improving circulation around the museum, was criticised for having a lack of exhibition space at a time when the museum was in serious financial difficulties and many galleries were closed to the public. at the same time the african collections that had been temporarily housed in 6 burlington gardens were given a new gallery in the north wing funded by the sainsbury family – with the donation valued at £25 million. [ 49 ] the museum's online database had nearly 4,500,000 individual object entries in 2,000,000 records at the start of 2023. [ 50 ] in 2022–23 there were 27 million visits to the website. [ 51 ] this compares with 19.5 millions website visits in 2013. [ 52 ] there were 5,820,860 visits to the museum in 2023, a 42% increase on 2022. the museum was the most visited tourist attraction in britain in 2023. the number of visits, however, has not recovered to the level reached before the covid pandemic. [ 53 ] a number of films have been shot at the british museum . [ 54 ] the british museum is a non-departmental public body sponsored by the department for culture, media and sport through a three-year funding agreement. its head is the director of the british museum . the british museum was run from its inception by a 'principal librarian' (when the book collections were still part of the museum), a role that was renamed 'director and principal librarian' in 1898, and 'director' in 1973 (on the separation of the british library). [ 55 ] a board of 25 trustees (with the director as their accounting officer for the purposes of reporting to government) is responsible for the general management and control of the museum, in accordance with the british museum act 1963 and the museums and galleries act 1992 . [ 56 ] prior to the 1963 act, it was chaired by the archbishop of canterbury , the lord chancellor and the speaker of the house of commons . the board was formed on the museum's inception to hold its collections in trust for the nation without actually owning them themselves, and now fulfil a mainly advisory role. trustee appointments are governed by the regulatory framework set out in the code of practice on public appointments issued by the office of the commissioner for public appointments. [ 57 ] the greek revival façade facing great russell street is a characteristic building of sir robert smirke , with 44 columns in the ionic order 45 ft (14 m) high, closely based on those of the temple of athena polias at priene in asia minor . the pediment over the main entrance is decorated by sculptures by sir richard westmacott depicting the progress of civilisation , consisting of fifteen allegorical figures, installed in 1852. [ 58 ] the construction commenced around the courtyard with the east wing ( the king's library ) in 1823–1828, followed by the north wing in 1833–1838, which originally housed among other galleries a reading room, now the wellcome gallery. work was also progressing on the northern half of the west wing (the egyptian sculpture gallery) 1826–1831, with montagu house demolished in 1842 to make room for the final part of the west wing, completed in 1846, and the south wing with its great colonnade, initiated in 1843 and completed in 1847, when the front hall and great staircase were opened to the public. [ 59 ] the museum is faced with portland stone , but the perimeter walls and other parts of the building were built using haytor granite from dartmoor in south devon, transported via the unique haytor granite tramway . [ 60 ] in 1846 robert smirke was replaced as the museum's architect by his brother sydney smirke , whose major addition was the round reading room 1854–1857; at 140 feet (43 m) in diameter it was then the second widest dome in the world, the pantheon in rome being slightly wider. the next major addition was the white wing 1882–1884 added behind the eastern end of the south front, the architect being sir john taylor . in 1895, parliament gave the museum trustees a loan of £200,000 to purchase from the duke of bedford all 69 houses which backed onto the museum building in the five surrounding streets – great russell street, montague street, montague place, bedford square and bloomsbury street. [ 61 ] the trustees planned to demolish these houses and to build around the west, north and east sides of the museum new galleries that would completely fill the block on which the museum stands. the architect sir john james burnet was petitioned to put forward ambitious long-term plans to extend the building on all three sides. most of the houses in montague place were knocked down a few years after the sale. of this grand plan only the edward vii galleries in the centre of the north front were ever constructed, these were built 1906–14 to the design by j.j. burnet, and opened by king george v and queen mary in 1914. they now house the museum's collections of prints and drawings and oriental antiquities. there was not enough money to put up more new buildings, and so the houses in the other streets are nearly all still standing. the duveen gallery, sited to the west of the egyptian, greek & assyrian sculpture galleries, was designed to house the elgin marbles by the american beaux-arts architect john russell pope . although completed in 1938, it was hit by a bomb in 1940 and remained semi-derelict for 22 years, before reopening in 1962. other areas damaged during world war ii bombing included: in september 1940 two unexploded bombs hit the edward vii galleries, the king's library received a direct hit from a high explosive bomb, incendiaries fell on the dome of the round reading room but did little damage; on the night of 10 to 11 may 1941 several incendiaries fell on the south-west corner of the museum, destroying the book stack and 150,000 books in the courtyard and the galleries around the top of the great staircase – this damage was not fully repaired until the early 1960s. [ 62 ] the queen elizabeth ii great court is a covered square at the centre of the british museum designed by the engineers buro happold and the architects foster and partners . [ 63 ] the great court opened in december 2000 and is the largest covered square in europe. the roof is a glass and steel construction, built by an austrian steelwork company, [ 64 ] with 1,656 uniquely shaped panes of glass. at the centre of the great court is the reading room vacated by the british library, its functions now moved to st pancras. today, the british museum has grown to become one of the largest museums in the world, covering an area of over 92,000 m 2 (990,000 sq. ft). [ 65 ] [ failed verification ] [ 66 ] in addition to 21,600 m 2 (232,000 sq. ft) [ 67 ] of on-site storage space, and 9,400 m 2 (101,000 sq. ft) [ 67 ] of external storage space. altogether, the british museum showcases on public display less than 1% [ 67 ] of its entire collection, approximately 50,000 items. [ 68 ] there are nearly one hundred galleries open to the public, representing 2 miles (3.2 km) of exhibition space, although the less popular ones have restricted opening times. however, the lack of a large temporary exhibition space led to the £135 million world conservation and exhibitions centre to provide one and to concentrate all the museum's conservation facilities into one centre. this project was announced in july 2007, with the architects rogers stirk harbour and partners . it was granted planning permission in december 2009 and was completed in time for the viking exhibition in march 2014. [ 69 ] [ 70 ] in 2017, the world conservation and exhibitions centre was shortlisted for the stirling prize for excellence in architecture. [ 71 ] blythe house in west kensington was used by the museum for off-site storage of small and medium-sized artefacts until the british museum archeological collection, a purpose built storage facility near reading , was opened in 2024. [ 72 ] another site franks house in east london is used for storage and work on the "early prehistory" – palaeolithic and mesolithic – and some other collections. [ 73 ] the british museum houses the world's largest [ h ] and most comprehensive collection of egyptian antiquities (with over 100,000 [ 74 ] pieces) outside the egyptian museum in cairo . a collection of immense importance for its range and quality, it includes objects of all periods from virtually every site of importance in egypt and the sudan . together, they illustrate every aspect of the cultures of the nile valley (including nubia ), from the predynastic neolithic period ( c. 10,000 bc ) through coptic (christian) times (12th century ad ), and up to the present day, a time-span over 11,000 years. [ 75 ] egyptian antiquities have formed part of the british museum collection ever since its foundation in 1753 after receiving 160 egyptian objects [ 76 ] from sir hans sloane . after the defeat of the french forces under napoleon at the battle of the nile in 1801, the egyptian antiquities collected were confiscated by the british army and presented to the british museum in 1803. these works, which included the famed rosetta stone , were the first important group of large sculptures to be acquired by the museum. thereafter, the uk appointed henry salt as consul in egypt who amassed a huge collection of antiquities, some of which were assembled and transported with great ingenuity by the famous italian explorer giovanni belzoni . most of the antiquities salt collected were purchased by the british museum and the musée du louvre . by 1866 the collection consisted of some 10,000 objects. antiquities from excavations started to come to the museum in the latter part of the 19th century as a result of the work of the egypt exploration fund under the efforts of e.a. wallis budge . over the years more than 11,000 objects came from this source, including pieces from amarna , bubastis and deir el-bahari . other organisations and individuals also excavated and donated objects to the british museum, including flinders petrie 's egypt research account and the british school of archaeology in egypt, as well as the university of oxford expedition to kawa and faras in sudan. active support by the museum for excavations in egypt continued to result in important acquisitions throughout the 20th century until changes in antiquities laws in egypt led to the suspension of policies allowing finds to be exported, although divisions still continue in sudan. the british museum conducted its own excavations in egypt where it received divisions of finds, including asyut (1907), mostagedda and matmar (1920s), ashmunein (1980s) and sites in sudan such as soba , kawa and the northern dongola reach (1990s). the size of the egyptian collections now stand at over 110,000 objects. [ 77 ] in autumn 2001 the eight million objects forming the museum's permanent collection were further expanded by the addition of six million objects from the wendorf collection of egyptian and sudanese prehistory . [ 78 ] these were donated by professor fred wendorf of southern methodist university in texas , and comprise the entire collection of artefacts and environmental remains from his excavations at prehistoric sites in the sahara desert between 1963 and 1997. other fieldwork collections have recently come from dietrich and rosemarie klemm ( university of munich ) and william adams ( university of kentucky ). the seven permanent egyptian galleries at the british museum, which include its largest exhibition space (room 4, for monumental sculpture), can display only 4% of its egyptian holdings. the second-floor galleries have a selection of the museum's collection of 140 mummies and coffins, the largest outside cairo . a high proportion of the collection comes from tombs or contexts associated with the cult of the dead, and it is these pieces, in particular the mummies, that remain among the most eagerly sought-after exhibits by visitors to the museum. predynastic and early dynastic period ( c. 6000 bc – c. 2690 bc ) the british museum has one of the world's largest and most comprehensive collections of antiquities from the classical world , with over 100,000 objects. [ 79 ] these mostly range in date from the beginning of the greek bronze age (about 3200 bc) to the establishment of christianity as the official religion of the roman empire, with the edict of milan under the reign of the roman emperor constantine i in 313 ad. archaeology was in its infancy during the nineteenth century and many pioneering individuals began excavating sites across the classical world, chief among them for the museum were charles newton , john turtle wood , robert murdoch smith and charles fellows . the greek objects originate from across the ancient greek world, from the mainland of greece and the aegean islands, to neighbouring lands in asia minor and egypt in the eastern mediterranean and as far as the western lands of magna graecia that include sicily and southern italy. the cycladic , minoan and mycenaean cultures are represented, and the greek collection includes important sculpture from the parthenon in athens, as well as elements of two of the seven wonders of the ancient world , the mausoleum at halicarnassus and the temple of artemis at ephesos . [ 79 ] beginning from the early bronze age , the department also houses one of the widest-ranging collections of italic and etruscan antiquities outside italy, as well as extensive groups of material from cyprus and non-greek colonies in lycia and caria on asia minor. there is some material from the roman republic , but the collection's strength is in its comprehensive array of objects from across the roman empire , with the exception of britain (which is the mainstay of the department of prehistory and europe). the collections of ancient jewellery and bronzes, greek vases (many from graves in southern italy that were once part of sir william hamilton 's and chevalier durand 's collections), roman glass including the famous cameo glass portland vase, roman gold glass (the second largest collection after the vatican museums ), roman mosaics from carthage and utica in north africa that were excavated by nathan davis , and silver hoards from roman gaul (some of which were bequeathed by the philanthropist and museum trustee richard payne knight ), are particularly important. cypriot antiquities are strong too and have benefited from the purchase of sir robert hamilton lang 's collection as well as the bequest of emma turner in 1892, which funded many excavations on the island. roman sculptures (many of which are copies of greek originals) are particularly well represented by the townley collection as well as residual sculptures from the famous farnese collection . objects from the department of greece and rome are located throughout the museum, although many of the architectural monuments are to be found on the ground floor, with connecting galleries from gallery 5 to gallery 23. on the upper floor, there are galleries devoted to smaller material from ancient italy, greece, cyprus and the roman empire. prehistoric greece and italy (3300 bc – 8th century bc) the collection encompasses architectural, sculptural and epigraphic items from many other sites across the classical world including amathus , atripalda , aphrodisias , delos , iasos , idalion , lindus , kalymnos , kerch , rhamnous , salamis , sestos , sounion , tomis and thessaloniki . with a collection numbering some 330,000 works, [ 82 ] the british museum possesses the world's largest and most important collection of mesopotamian antiquities outside iraq . a collection of immense importance, the holdings of assyrian sculpture , babylonian and sumerian antiquities are among the most comprehensive in the world with entire suites of rooms panelled in alabaster assyrian palace reliefs from nimrud , nineveh and khorsabad . the collections represent the civilisations of the ancient near east and its adjacent areas. these cover mesopotamia , persia , the arabian peninsula , anatolia , the caucasus , parts of central asia , syria , the holy land and phoenician settlements in the western mediterranean from the prehistoric period and include objects from the 7th century. the first significant addition of mesopotamian objects was from the collection of claudius james rich in 1825. the collection was later dramatically enlarged by the excavations of a. h. layard at the assyrian sites of nimrud and nineveh between 1845 and 1851. at nimrud, layard discovered the north-west palace of ashurnasirpal ii , as well as three other palaces and various temples. he later uncovered the palace of sennacherib at nineveh with 'no less than seventy-one halls'. as a result, a large numbers of lamassus , palace reliefs, stelae , including the black obelisk of shalmaneser iii , were brought to the british museum. layard's work was continued by his assistant, hormuzd rassam and in 1852–1854 he went on to discover the north palace of ashurbanipal at nineveh with many magnificent reliefs, including the famous lion hunt of ashurbanipal and lachish reliefs . he also discovered the royal library of ashurbanipal , a large collection of cuneiform tablets of enormous importance that today number around 130,000 pieces. w. k. loftus excavated in nimrud between 1850 and 1855 and found a remarkable hoard of ivories in the burnt palace. between 1878 and 1882 rassam greatly improved the museum's holdings with exquisite objects including the cyrus cylinder from babylon , the bronze gates from balawat , important objects from sippar , and a fine collection of urartian bronzes from toprakkale including a copper figurine of a winged, human-headed bull. in the early 20th century excavations were carried out at carchemish , turkey by d. g. hogarth and leonard woolley , the latter assisted by t. e. lawrence . the mesopotamian collections were greatly augmented by excavations in southern iraq after world war i . from tell al-ubaid came the bronze furnishings of a sumerian temple, including life-sized lions and a panel featuring the lion-headed eagle indugud found by h. r. hall in 1919–24. woolley went on to excavate ur between 1922 and 1934, discovering the royal cemeteries of the 3rd millennium bc. some of the masterpieces include the standard of ur , the ram in a thicket , the royal game of ur , and two bull-headed lyres . the department also has three diorite statues of the ruler gudea from the ancient state of lagash and a series of limestone kudurru or boundary stones from different locations across ancient mesopotamia . although the collections centre on mesopotamia, most of the surrounding areas are well represented. the achaemenid collection was enhanced with the addition of the oxus treasure in 1897 and objects excavated by the german scholar ernst herzfeld and the hungarian-british explorer sir aurel stein . reliefs and sculptures from the site of persepolis were donated by sir gore ouseley in 1825 and the 5th earl of aberdeen in 1861 and the museum received part of a pot-hoard of jewellery from pasargadae as the division of finds in 1963 and part of the ziwiye hoard in 1971. a large column base from the one hundred column hall at persepolis was acquired in exchange from the oriental institute , chicago. moreover, the museum has been able to acquire one of the greatest assemblages of achaemenid silverware in the world. the later sasanian empire is also well represented by ornate silver plates and cups, many representing ruling monarchs hunting lions and deer. phoenician antiquities come from across the region, but the tharros collection from sardinia , the hoard of about 150 metal bowls and hundreds of ivories from nimrud, phœnician inscriptions from carthage including the son of baalshillek marble base , the carthage tariff and the carthage tower model and the many punic stelae from carthage and maghrawa in tunisia (such as the ghorafa stelae [ fr ] ) are outstanding. the number of phoenician inscriptions from sites across cyprus is also considerable, and include artefacts found at the kition necropolis (with the two kition tariffs having the longest phoenician inscription discovered on the island), the idalion temple site and two bilingual pedestals found at tamassos . another often overlooked highlight is yemeni antiquities, the finest collection outside that country. furthermore, the museum has a representative collection of dilmun and parthian material excavated from various burial mounds at the ancient sites of a'ali and shakhura (that included a roman ribbed glass bowl) in bahrain. from the modern state of syria come almost forty funerary busts from palmyra and a group of stone reliefs from the excavations of max von oppenheim at tell halaf that was purchased in 1920. more material followed from the excavations of max mallowan at chagar bazar and tell brak in 1935–1938 and from woolley at alalakh in the years just before and after world war ii . mallowan returned with his wife agatha christie to carry out further digs at nimrud in the postwar period which secured many important artefacts for the museum. the collection of palestinian material was strengthened by the work of kathleen kenyon at tell es-sultan (jericho) in the 1950s and the acquisition in 1980 of around 17,000 objects found at lachish by the wellcome-marston expedition of 1932–1938. archaeological digs are still taking place where permitted in the middle east, and, depending on the country, the museum continues to receive a share of the finds from sites such as tell es sa'idiyeh [ de ] in jordan. the museum's collection of islamic art , including archaeological material, numbers about 40,000 objects, [ 83 ] one of the largest of its kind in the world. as such, it contains a broad range of pottery, paintings, tiles, metalwork, glass, seals, and inscriptions from across the islamic world, from spain in the west to india in the east. it is particularly famous for its collection of iznik ceramics (the largest in the world), its large number of mosque lamps including one from the dome of the rock , mediaeval metalwork such as the vaso vescovali with its depictions of the zodiac , a fine selection of astrolabes , and mughal paintings and precious artwork including a large jade terrapin made for the emperor jahangir . thousands of objects were excavated after the war by professional archaeologists at iranian sites such as siraf by david whitehouse and alamut castle by peter willey. the collection was augmented in 1983 by the godman bequest of iznik, hispano-moresque and early iranian pottery. artefacts from the islamic world are on display in gallery 34 of the museum. a representative selection from the department of middle east, including the most important pieces, are on display in 13 galleries throughout the museum and total some 4,500 objects. a whole suite of rooms on the ground floor display the sculptured reliefs from the assyrian palaces at nineveh, nimrud and khorsabad, while 8 galleries on the upper floor hold smaller material from ancient sites across the middle east. the remainder form the study collection which ranges in size from beads to large sculptures. they include approximately 130,000 cuneiform tablets from mesopotamia. [ 84 ] the department of prints and drawings holds the national collection of western prints and drawings. it ranks as one of the largest and best print room collections in existence alongside the albertina in vienna, the paris collections and the hermitage . the holdings are easily accessible to the general public in the study room, unlike many such collections. [ 85 ] the department also has its own exhibition gallery in room 90, where the displays and exhibitions change several times a year. [ 86 ] since its foundation in 1808, the prints and drawings collection has grown to international renown as one of the richest and most representative collections in the world. there are approximately 50,000 drawings and over two million prints. [ 86 ] the collection of drawings covers the period from the 14th century to the present, and includes many works of the highest quality by the leading artists of the european schools . the collection of prints covers the tradition of fine printmaking from its beginnings in the 15th century up to the present, with near complete holdings of most of the great names before the 19th century. key benefactors to the department have been clayton mordaunt cracherode , richard payne knight , john malcolm, campbell dodgson , césar mange de hauke and tomás harris . writer and author louis alexander fagan , who worked in the department 1869–1894 made significant contributions to the department in form of his handbook to the department , as well as various other books about the museum in general. [ 87 ] there are groups of drawings by leonardo da vinci , raphael , michelangelo , (including his only surviving full-scale cartoon ), dürer (a collection of 138 drawings is one of the finest in existence), peter paul rubens , rembrandt , claude and watteau , and largely complete collections of the works of all the great printmakers including dürer (99 engravings , 6 etchings and most of his 346 woodcuts ), rembrandt and goya . more than 30,000 british drawings and watercolours include important examples of work by hogarth , sandby , turner , girtin , constable , cotman , cox , gillray , rowlandson , towne and cruikshank , as well as all the great victorians . the collection contains the unique set of watercolours by the pioneering colonist john white , the first british artist in america and first european to paint native americans. there are about a million british prints including more than 20,000 satires and outstanding collections of works by william blake and thomas bewick . [ citation needed ] . the great eleven volume catalogue of political and personal satires preserved in the department of prints and drawings in the british museum compiled between 1870 and 1954 is the definitive reference work for the study of british satirical prints. over 500,000 objects from the department are now on the online collection database, many with high-quality images. [ 88 ] a 2011 donation of £1 million enabled the museum to acquire a complete set of pablo picasso 's vollard suite . [ 89 ] the department of britain, europe and prehistory is responsible for collections that cover a vast expanse of time and geography. it includes some of the earliest objects made by humans in east africa over 2 million years ago, as well as prehistoric and neolithic objects from other parts of the world; and the art and archaeology of europe from the earliest times to the present day. archeological excavation of prehistoric material took off and expanded considerably in the twentieth century and the department now has literally millions of objects from the paleolithic and mesolithic periods throughout the world, as well as from the neolithic , bronze age and iron age in europe. stone age material from africa has been donated by famous archaeologists such as louis and mary leakey , and gertrude caton–thompson . paleolithic objects from the sturge , christy and lartet collections include some of the earliest works of art from europe. many bronze age objects from across europe were added during the nineteenth century, often from large collections built up by excavators and scholars such as greenwell in britain, tobin and cooke in ireland, lukis and de la grancière in brittany, worsaae in denmark, siret at el argar in spain, and klemm and edelmann in germany. a representative selection of iron age artefacts from hallstatt were acquired as a result of the evans / lubbock excavations and from giubiasco in ticino through the swiss national museum . in addition, the british museum's collections covering the period ad 300 to 1100 are among the largest and most comprehensive in the world, extending from spain to the black sea and from north africa to scandinavia ; a representative selection of these has recently been redisplayed in a newly refurbished gallery. important collections include latvian, norwegian, gotlandic and merovingian material from johann karl bähr , alfred heneage cocks, sir james curle and philippe delamain respectively. however, the undoubted highlight from the early mediaeval period is the magnificent items from the sutton hoo royal grave, generously donated to the nation by the landowner edith pretty . the late mediaeval collection includes a large number of seal-dies from across europe, the most famous of which include those from the town of boppard in germany, isabella of hainault from her tomb in notre dame cathedral , paris, inchaffray abbey in scotland and robert fitzwalter , one of the barons who led the revolt against king john in england. there is also a large collection of medieval signet rings, prominent among them is the gold signet ring belonging to jean iii de grailly who fought in the hundred years' war , as well as those of mary, queen of scots and richard i of england . other groups of artefacts represented in the department include the national collection of (c.100) icon paintings , most of which originate from the byzantine empire and russia, and over 40 mediaeval astrolabes from across europe and the middle east. the department also includes the national collection of horology with one of the most wide-ranging assemblage of clocks, watches and other timepieces in europe, with masterpieces from every period in the development of time-keeping. choice horological pieces came from the morgan and ilbert collections. the department is also responsible for the curation of romano-british objects – the museum has by far the most extensive such collection in britain and one of the most representative regional collections in europe outside italy. it is particularly famous for the large number of late roman silver treasures, many of which were found in east anglia , the most important of which is the mildenhall treasure . the museum purchased many roman-british objects from the antiquarian charles roach smith in 1856. these quickly formed the nucleus of the collection. the department also includes ethnographic material from across europe including a collection of bulgarian costumes and shadow puppets from greece and turkey. a particular highlight are the three sámi drums from northern sweden of which only about 70 are extant. objects from the department of britain, europe and prehistory are mostly found on the upper floor of the museum, with a suite of galleries numbered from 38 to 51. most of the collection is stored in its archive facilities, where it is available for research and study. the many hoards of treasure include those of esquiline , carthage , first cyprus , hockwold , hoxne , lampsacus , mildenhall , vale of york and water newton , (4th–10th centuries ad) the scope of the department of asia is extremely broad; its collections of over 75,000 objects cover the material culture of the whole asian continent and from the neolithic up to the present day. until recently, this department concentrated on collecting oriental antiquities from urban or semi-urban societies across the asian continent. many of those objects were collected by colonial officers and explorers in former parts of the british empire , especially the indian subcontinent. examples include the collections made by individuals such as james wilkinson breeks , sir alexander cunningham , sir harold deane , sir walter elliot , james prinsep , charles masson , sir john marshall and charles stuart . a large number of chinese antiquities were purchased from the anglo-greek banker george eumorfopoulos in the 1930s. the large collection of some 1800 japanese prints and paintings owned by arthur morrison was acquired in the early twentieth century. in the second half of the twentieth century, the museum greatly benefited from the bequest of the philanthropist pt brooke sewell, which allowed the department to purchase many objects and fill in gaps in the collection. [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] in 2004, the ethnographic collections from asia were transferred to the department. these reflect the diverse environment of the largest continent in the world and range from india to china, the middle east to japan. much of the ethnographic material comes from objects originally owned by tribal cultures and hunter-gatherers , many of whose way of life has disappeared in the last century. particularly valuable collections are from the andaman and nicobar islands (much assembled by the british naval officer maurice portman ), sri lanka (especially through the colonial administrator hugh nevill ), northern thailand, south-west china, the ainu of hokkaido in japan (chief among them the collection of the scottish zoologist john anderson ), siberia (with artefacts collected by the explorer kate marsden and bassett digby and is notable for its sakha pieces, especially the ivory model of a summer festival at yakutsk ) and the islands of south-east asia, especially borneo. the latter benefited from the purchase in 1905 of the sarawak collection put together by dr charles hose , as well as from other colonial officers such as edward a jeffreys. in addition, a unique and valuable group of objects from java, including shadow puppets and a gamelan musical set, was assembled by sir stamford raffles . the principal gallery devoted to asian art in the museum is gallery 33 with its comprehensive display of chinese, indian subcontinent and south-east asian objects. an adjacent gallery showcases the amaravati sculptures and monuments. other galleries on the upper floors are devoted to its japanese, korean, painting and calligraphy , and chinese ceramics collections. the british museum houses one of the world's most comprehensive collections of ethnographic material from africa, oceania and the americas, representing the cultures of indigenous peoples throughout the world. over 350,000 objects [ 99 ] spanning thousands of years tells the history of mankind from three major continents and many rich and diverse cultures; the collecting of modern artefacts is ongoing. many individuals have added to the department's collection over the years but those assembled by henry christy , harry beasley and william oldman are outstanding. objects from this department are mostly on display in several galleries on the ground and lower floors. gallery 24 displays ethnographic from every continent while adjacent galleries focus on north america and mexico. a long suite of rooms (gallery 25) on the lower floor display african art. there are plans in place to develop permanent galleries for showcasing art from oceania and south america. the sainsbury african galleries display 600 objects from the greatest permanent collection of african arts and culture in the world. the three permanent galleries provide a substantial exhibition space for the museum's african collection comprising over 200,000 objects. a curatorial scope that encompasses both archaeological and contemporary material, including both unique masterpieces of artistry and objects of everyday life. a great addition was material amassed by sir henry wellcome , which was donated by the wellcome historical medical museum in 1954. highlights of the african collection include objects found at megalithic circles in the gambia, a dozen exquisite afro-portuguese ivories , a series of soapstone figures from the kissi people in sierra leone and liberia, hoard of bronze kru currency rings from the sinoe river in liberia , asante goldwork and regalia from ghana including the bowdich collection, the rare akan drum from the same region in west africa, pair of door panels and lintel from the palace at ikere-ekiti in yorubaland , the benin and igbo-ukwu bronze sculptures, the beautiful bronze head of queen idia , a magnificent brass head of a yoruba ruler and quartz throne from ife , a similar terracotta head from iwinrin grove near ife, the apapa hoard from lagos and other mediaeval bronze hoards from allabia and the forçados river in southern nigeria. included is an ikom monolith from cross river state , several ancestral screens from the kalabari tribe in the niger delta, the torday collection of central african sculpture, textiles and weaponry from the kuba kingdom including three royal figures , the unique luzira head from uganda, processional crosses and other ecclesiastical and royal material from gondar and magdala , ethiopia following the british expedition to abyssinia , excavated objects from great zimbabwe (that includes a unique soapstone, anthropomorphic figure) and satellite towns such as mutare including a large hoard of iron age soapstone figures, a rare divining bowl from the venda peoples and cave paintings and petroglyphs from south africa . the british museum's oceanic collections originate from the vast area of the pacific ocean, stretching from papua new guinea to easter island, from new zealand to hawaii. the three main anthropological groups represented in the collection are polynesia , melanesia and micronesia – aboriginal art from australia is considered separately in its own right. metal working was not indigenous to oceania before europeans arrived, so many of the artefacts from the collection are made from stone, shell, bone and bamboo. prehistoric objects from the region include a bird-shaped pestle and a group of stone mortars from papua new guinea . the british museum is fortunate in having some of the earliest oceanic and pacific collections, many of which were put together by members of cook 's and vancouver 's expeditions or by colonial administrators and explorers such as sir george grey , sir frederick broome , joseph bradshaw , robert christison , gregory mathews , frederick meinertzhagen, thomas mitchell and arthur gordon , before western culture significantly impacted on indigenous cultures. the department has also benefited greatly from the legacy of pioneering anthropologists such as ac haddon , bronisław malinowski and katherine routledge . an artefact is a wooden aboriginal shield , probably dating from the late eighteenth century. [ 100 ] there is some debate as to whether this shield was found at botany bay or, given the nature of the wood being red mangrove which grows abundantly only 500 km north of botany bay, possibly obtained through trade networks or at an entirely different location. [ 101 ] [ 102 ] the wilson cabinet of curiosities from palau is an example of pre-contact ware. another outstanding exemplar is the mourner's dress from tahiti given to cook on his second voyage , one of only ten in existence. in the collection is a large war canoe from the island of vella lavella in the solomon islands , one of the last ever to be built in the archipelago. [ 103 ] the māori collection is the finest outside new zealand with many intricately carved wooden and jade objects and the aboriginal art collection is distinguished by its wide range of bark paintings , including two very early bark etchings collected by john hunter kerr . a particularly important group of objects was purchased from the london missionary society in 1911, that includes the unique statue of a'a from rurutu island, the rare idol from the isle of mangareva and the cook islands deity figure . other highlights include the huge hawaiian statue of kū-ka-ili-moku or god of war (one of three extant in the world) and the famous easter island statues hoa hakananai'a and moai hava . the americas collection mainly consists of 19th and 20th century items although the paracas , moche , inca , maya , aztec , taino and other early cultures are well represented. the kayung totem pole , which was made in the late nineteenth century on haida gwaii , dominates the great court and provides a fitting introduction to this very wide-ranging collection that stretches from the very north of the north american continent where the inuit population has lived for centuries, to the tip of south america where indigenous tribes have long thrived in patagonia. highlights of the collection include aboriginal canadian and native american objects from north america collected by the 5th earl of lonsdale , the marquis of lorne , the explorer david haig-thomas and bryan mullanphy , mayor of st. louis , the squier and davis collection of prehistoric mound relics from north america, two carved stone bowls in the form of a seated human figure made by ancient north west coast peoples from british columbia , the headdress of chief yellow calf from the arapaho tribe in wyoming , a lidded rivercane basket from south carolina and the earliest historic example of cherokee basketry, a selection of pottery vessels found in prehistoric dwellings at mesa verde and casas grandes , one of the enigmatic crystal skulls of unknown origin, a collection of nine turquoise aztec mosaics from mexico (the largest in europe), important artefacts from teotihuacan and isla de sacrificios . there are several rare pre-columbian manuscripts including the codex zouche-nuttall and codex waecker-gotter and post-colonial ones such as the codex aubin and codex kingsborough , a spectacular series of mayan lintels from yaxchilan excavated by the british mayanist alfred maudslay , a very high quality mayan collection that includes sculptures from copan , tikal , tulum , pusilha , naranjo and nebaj (including the celebrated fenton vase ), an ornate calcite vase with jaguar handles from the ulua valley in honduras, the lord moyne collection from the bay islands , honduras and boyle collection from nicaragua , over 20 stone metates with zoomorphic and anthropomorphic ornamentation from costa rica, a group of zemi figures from vere, jamaica , and wooden duhos from the dominican republic and the bahamas . there are a collection of pre-columbian human mummies from sites across south america including ancon , acari , arica and leyva , a number of prestigious pre-columbian gold and votive objects from colombia, three axe-shaped gold diadems found near camaná from the siguas culture in peru, unique collection of moche wooden figures and staffs from the macabi islands [ es ] off peru, ethnographic objects from across the amazon region including the schomburgk and maybury lewis collections and part of the von martius and von spix collection, two rare tiwanaku pottery vessels from lake titicaca and important items from tierra del fuego donated by commander phillip parker king . the british museum is home to one of the world's finest numismatic collections, comprising about a million objects, including coins, medals, tokens and paper money. the collection spans the entire history of coinage from its origins in the 7th century bc to the present day and is representative of both the east and west. the department of coins and medals was created in 1861 and celebrated its 150th anniversary in 2011. [ 104 ] this department was founded in 1920. conservation has six specialist areas: ceramics & glass; metals; organic material (including textiles); stone, wall paintings and mosaics; eastern pictorial art and western pictorial art. the science department [ 105 ] has and continues to develop techniques to date artefacts, analyse and identify the materials used in their manufacture, to identify the place an artefact originated and the techniques used in their creation. the department also publishes its findings and discoveries. this department covers all levels of education, from casual visitors, schools, degree level and beyond. the museum's various libraries hold in excess of 350,000 books, journals and pamphlets covering all areas of the museum's collection. also the general museum archives which date from its foundation in 1753 are overseen by this department; the individual departments have their own separate archives and libraries covering their various areas of responsibility, which can be consulted by the public on application. the anthropology library is especially large, with 120,000 volumes. [ 106 ] however, the paul hamlyn library, which had become the central reference library of the british museum and the only library there freely open to the general public, closed permanently in august 2011. [ 107 ] the website and online database of the collection also provide increasing amounts of information. the british museum press (bmp) is the publishing business and a division of the british museum company ltd., a company and a charity (established in 1973) wholly owned by the trustees of the british museum. [ 108 ] the bmp publishes both popular and scholarly illustrated books to accompany the exhibition programme and explore aspects of the general collection. profits from their sales goes to support the british museum. [ 108 ] scholarly titles are published in the research publications series, all of which are peer-reviewed . this series was started in 1978 and was originally called occasional papers. the series is designed to disseminate research on items in the collection. to date, over 200 books have been published in this series. between six and eight titles are published each year in this series. [ 109 ] they can be found on the british museum research repository . it is a point of controversy whether museums should possess artefacts illegally taken from other countries, [ 7 ] [ 110 ] and the british museum is a notable target for criticism. the elgin marbles , the benin bronzes , ethiopian tabots and the rosetta stone are among the most disputed objects in its collections, and organisations have been formed demanding the return of these artefacts to their native countries. the elgin marbles or parthenon marbles claimed by greece have been cited by unesco , among others, for restitution. from 1801 to 1812, lord elgin's agents removed about half of the surviving sculptures from the parthenon, as well as sculptures from the propylaea and erechtheum . the former director of the museum has stated, "we are indebted to elgin for having rescued the parthenon sculptures and others from the acropolis from the destruction they were suffering, as well as from the damage that the acropolis monuments, including the sculptures that he did not remove, have suffered since." [ 111 ] the british museum itself damaged some of the artefacts during restoration in the 1930s. [ 112 ] in late 2022, the british museum had entered into preliminary negotiations with the greek government about the future of the sculptures. [ 113 ] there is also controversy over artefacts taken during the destruction of the old summer palace in beijing by an anglo-french expeditionary force during the second opium war in 1860, an event which drew protest from victor hugo . [ 114 ] [ 115 ] the british museum and the victoria and albert museum , among others, have been asked since 2009 to open their archives for investigation by a team of chinese investigators as a part of an international mission to document chinese national treasures in foreign collections. [ 116 ] in 2010 neil macgregor , the former director of the british museum, said he hoped that both british and chinese investigators would work together on the controversial collection. [ 117 ] in 2020 the museum appointed a curator to research the history of its collections, including disputed items. [ 118 ] the british museum has stated that the "restitutionist premise, that whatever was made in a country must return to an original geographical site, would empty both the british museum and the other great museums of the world". [ 119 ] the museum has also argued that the british museum act of 1963 prevents any object from leaving its collection once it has entered it. "the museum owns its collections, but its trustees are not empowered to dispose of them". [ 119 ] [ 120 ] nevertheless, it has returned items such as tasmanian aboriginal burial remains when this was consistent with legislation regarding the disposal of items in the collections. [ 121 ] in 2002 the heirs of arthur feldmann, an art collector murdered in the holocaust , requested that four old master drawings stolen by the gestapo in 1939 be returned to the family. a uk high court judge ruled in 2005 that it would be illegal for the british museum to return artworks looted by the nazis to a jewish family, despite its willingness and moral obligation to do so. [ 144 ] [ 145 ] the law was changed in 2009, [ 146 ] and again in 2022 [ 147 ] giving museums additional powers to return looted art or provide compensation. feldmann's heirs accepted a compensation payment for a looted drawing and stated that they were happy the drawing would remain in the british museum collection. [ 148 ] according to the british museum spoliation report published by the collections trust in 2017, "around 30% of some 21,350 continental and british drawings acquired since 1933 have an uncertain or incomplete provenance for the 1933–1945 period". [ 149 ] the museum lists these works on its website and investigates claims for restitution. [ 150 ] since 2016, there have been a number of protests by activist groups, trade unions and the public against the british museum's relationship with the oil company bp which the protesters believe implicates the museum in global warming. [ 151 ] in july 2019, ahdaf soueif resigned from the british museum's board of trustees in protest against the sponsorship. [ 152 ] in february 2020, 1,500 demonstrators, including british museum staff, took part in a day of protest over the issue. [ 153 ] in december 2023, it was announced that the british museum had agreed to a new £50 million sponsorship deal with bp. [ 154 ] the chairman's advisory group is an informal group of business leaders who provide advice to the chairman on various issues including the museum's relationship with the british government and policy on the museum's collections. its existence was made public after a freedom of information request by a group campaigning against the museum's links with the fossil fuel industry. the museum has declined to name the members of the advisory group as they are acting in their personal capacity. [ 155 ] thefts from the museum include: several historic coins and medals in the 1970s; [ 156 ] a 17th-century japanese kakiemon figure in 1990; two meiji figurines and a fragment of a gold ring in 1991; fifteen roman coins and jewellery worth £250,000 in 1993; and a japanese chest and two persian books in 1996. [ 157 ] in july 2002 a marble head, valued at £50,000, was stolen from the archaic greek gallery. [ 158 ] in 2004, 15 chinese artefacts including jewels, ornate hairpins and fingernail guards were stolen. in 2017, it was revealed that a cartier diamond had been missing since 2011. [ 156 ] in august 2023, a staff member was fired after it emerged that items including gold, jewellery and gems had been stolen over a "significant" period of time. the incident led to an investigation by the metropolitan police and an independent review by the museum. [ 159 ] some of the missing artefacts were later found to have been sold on ebay for considerably less than their estimated value. [ 156 ] the museum had been warned of the thefts as early as 2021. the museum's director, hartwig fischer , resigned because of the museum's inadequate response to the warnings of theft. [ 160 ] the number of artefacts stolen was estimated to be about 2,000. [ 161 ] as a consequence of the thefts, the museum announced a five-year plan to digitise the complete collection and make it available to view online. [ 162 ] by may 2024, 626 of the missing items had been recovered. [ 163 ] in august 2023, the british museum reached a settlement with the translator yilin wang over her translations of poetry by qiu jin . the museum had used her work without credit or permission in their exhibition china's hidden century which ran between may 2023 and october 2023. [ 164 ] in january 2025, the british museum was criticized by tibetan human rights groups for referring to tibet as "xizang," the current preferred term of the government of the people's republic of china . [ 165 ] the museum has a collaboration with the google cultural institute to bring the collection online. [ 166 ] forgotten empire exhibition (october 2005 – january 2006) from january to april 2012 the museum presented hajj: journey to the heart of islam , the first major exhibition on the topic of the hajj , the pilgrimage that is one of the five pillars of islam . [ 167 ] [ 168 ] the old elgin gallery was painted a deep terracotta red, which, though in some ways satisfactory, diminished its apparent size, and was apt to produce a depressing effect on the visitor. it was decided to experiment with lighter colours, and the walls of the large room were painted with what was, at its first application, a pure cold white, but which after a year's exposure had unfortunately yellowed. the small elgin room was painted with pure white tinted with prussian blue, and the room of the metopes was painted with pure white tinted with cobalt blue and black; it was necessary, for practical reasons, to colour all the dadoes a darker colour [ 41 ] it is, i suppose, not positively bad, but it could have been infinitely better. it is pretentious, in that it uses the ancient marbles to decorate itself. this is a long outmoded idea, and the exact opposite of what a sculpture gallery should do. and, although it incorporates them, it is out of scale, and tends to dwarf them with its bogus doric features, including those columns, supporting almost nothing which would have made an ancient greek artist architect wince. the source of daylight is too high above the sculptures, a fault that is only concealed by the amount of reflection from the pinkish marble walls. these are too similar in colour to the marbles... these half-dozen elementary errors were pointed out by everyone in the museum, and by many scholars outside, when the building was projected. [ 46 ] 51°31′10″n 0°7′37″w ﻿ / ﻿ 51.51944°n 0.12694°w ﻿ / 51.51944; -0.12694

athanasios sergiou rhousopoulos ( greek : αθανάσιος σεργίου ρουσόπουλος ) (1823 – 13 december [ o.s. 1 december] 1898 [ a ] ) was a greek archaeologist , antiquities dealer and university professor. he has been described as "the most important greek collector and dealer between the 1860s and 1890s", [ 2 ] and as "a key figure in the early days of archaeology in greece." [ 3 ] born in 1823 in a region of northern greece under the ottoman empire , rhousopoulos was educated in constantinople and athens before receiving financial support from the antiquarian and philanthropist konstantinos bellios to pursue formal archaeological training in germany. in 1853, he returned to greece to work as a teacher, before being appointed to a post at the university of athens in 1855. he wrote and translated numerous educational works concerning greek history, culture and archaeology. rhousopoulos played a significant role in the foundation of the national archaeological museum of athens , and was a prominent member of the archaeological society of athens , itself an important fixture in greek archaeology during his lifetime. he excavated in athens's theatre of dionysus as well as in the kerameikos , where his 1863 discovery of the grave stele of dexileos helped to confirm that the site was that of athens's ancient cemetery . he attracted controversy in the early 1870s for his criticism of the german archaeologist heinrich schliemann , and of schliemann's claim to have found artefacts from the trojan war at the site of hisarlik . rhousopoulos was renowned for his collection of ancient artefacts, particularly coins, which was considered among the most impressive private collections in greece. he was also a prominent dealer of antiquities, trading regularly with collectors, museums and society figures from around the world, and heavily involved in the illegal excavation and trafficking of ancient artefacts. from 1865, his activities came to increasing public and official attention, particularly that of the ephor general , panagiotis efstratiadis ; rhousopoulos was fined after his illegal sale of the aineta aryballos to the british museum , and expelled from the archaeological society. dismissed from his academic post in 1884 for reasons that remain unclear, rhousopoulos died in 1898. he made significant contributions to greek epigraphy , and was a major source of artefacts for several of the world's largest museums. in the twenty-first century, study of his extensive correspondence, particularly with the british scholars george rolleston and arthur evans , has provided important evidence for the practice of archaeology and antiquities trading in nineteenth-century greece. athanasios sergiou rhousopoulos was born in 1823, in the village of vogatsiko , near kastoria in the northern greek region of macedonia , then part of the ottoman empire . [ 4 ] [ b ] he received his early education in constantinople and athens. [ 4 ] in 1846, konstantinos bellios , a wealthy greek merchant and antiquarian then living in vienna, funded rhousopoulos to attend leipzig university [ 6 ] and the friedrich wilhelm university in berlin. he studied greek literature and archaeology, before moving to the university of göttingen , which awarded him a doctorate in 1852. rhousopoulos wrote his thesis , entitled de zamolxide secundum veterum auctoritatem ( on zalmoxis, according to the authority of the ancients ), in ancient greek . [ 4 ] it was the first doctoral dissertation ever written on zalmoxis , [ 7 ] a thracian deity mentioned by the ancient greek historian herodotus . [ 4 ] in 1853, rhousopoulos returned to greece. from 1855 until 1858, [ 8 ] he worked as a teacher in the first gymnasium (secondary school) of patras , [ 9 ] in the northern peloponnese . during his time in patras, he translated the danish philologist ernst bojesen's [ wikidata ] handbook of greek antiquity ( german : handbuch der griechischen antiquitäten ) into greek for use as a school textbook. [ 4 ] he also taught greek for twenty-four years at the rizarios ecclesiastical school of athens , and spent four years teaching ancient greek civilisation at the athens polytechnic . [ 10 ] in 1855, he was appointed to a temporary professorship of greek at the university of athens . [ 4 ] in the same year, he published manual of greek archaeology , a textbook which has been situated within the early-nineteenth-century trend for archaeological works relying primarily on literary sources rather than material culture to reconstruct the past. [ 11 ] in 1857, he constructed a house for himself on lycabettus street in central athens, excavating in the process three hundred ancient tombs on the site. [ 12 ] his professorship was made permanent in 1860. [ 4 ] the archaeological society of athens , a learned society founded in 1837, had significant responsibility for archaeological work and heritage management in greece throughout the 19th century. [ 13 ] it had stagnated and all but disbanded between april 1854 and 1858, [ 14 ] under pressure from its own financial troubles and a cholera outbreak that had killed its president, georgios gennadios . [ 14 ] the society reformed in 1858: in 1859, rhousopoulos was elected to its governing council, as the only member of the council with a background in archaeology rather than philology. [ 15 ] in 1862, the society re-established the archaeological journal ( greek : αρχαιολογική εφημερίς , romanized : archaiologiki efimeris ), which published news of excavations and of the activities of the society and of the greek archaeological service . [ 16 ] rhousopoulos was the head of publications for its first twelve issues. [ 4 ] his eleven articles in the journal focused primarily on greek literature and culture, with only a few on archaeology. [ 4 ] during the 1860s and 1870s, he was involved in the foundation of the national archaeological museum in athens, which eventually opened in 1893. [ 4 ] in 1864, he was selected by the ministry of education and religious affairs to serve on a committee to identify a suitable location for what became the national archaeological museum , which included prominent archaeological figures such as panagiotis efstratiadis , stefanos koumanoudis and alexandros rizos rangavis . [ 18 ] rhousopoulos worked on categorising the materials transferred to the new museum from other institutions around greece. [ 4 ] rhousopoulos's discovery in the spring of 1863 of the grave stele of dexileos , alongside the contemporary excavation of the nearby funerary enclosure of agathon, helped to identify the location of the ancient athenian cemetery known as the kerameikos . [ 19 ] in 1866, excavations conducted by rhousopoulos and his fellow archaeologist petros pervanoglou near the theatre of dionysus on the slopes of the acropolis of athens uncovered a marble sphere, approximately 0.91 metres (3.0 ft) in circumference, inscribed with images of the god helios and magical inscriptions. [ 20 ] in 1868, rhousopoulos was moved from his professorship in greek to one in archaeology at the university of athens. [ 4 ] he was unusual among athens's early archaeological professors for not having worked for the greek archaeological service. [ 21 ] on 22 october [ o.s. 10 october] 1884, rhousopoulos was dismissed from his post. the reasons for his dismissal are uncertain: the greek newspaper skrip [ el ] ( σκριπ ) reported that he had left his post "on account of old age". [ 22 ] the archaeologist and archaeological historian yannis galanakis has, however, suggested that rhousopoulos was more likely dismissed on grounds of ill health, given that his age of 61 was relatively young, though little information about his health is available. [ 23 ] rhousopoulos has been described as "a particularly vehement critic" of heinrich schliemann , the german archaeologist who excavated the site of hisarlik ( troy ) in various phases between 1871 and 1890. [ 24 ] on 30 august [ o.s. 18 august] 1873, the german newspaper neue hannoversche zeitung [ de ] published a report of a conversation between rhousopoulos and a number of his friends while he had been visiting hannover . the newspaper reported the comment that the so-called treasure of priam , which schliemann had excavated in may of that year, was "undoubtedly one of the most important [finds] of its kind", but that the period to which it belonged was uncertain; separately, the article quoted the judgement that schliemann's find had "self-evidently nothing to do with the treasure of priam ." [ 25 ] although it was unclear from the neue hannoversche zeitung 's report which, if any, of these remarks had been made by rhousopoulos himself, as opposed to his conversation partners, the report attracted a bitter response from w. gosrau, the court chaplain of george i of greece , who accused rhousopoulos of having "driven the learned gentlemen wild" out of "bread-envy" ( german : brodneid ). [ 25 ] in november, the hannoverscher courier [ de ] , a rival newspaper of the neue hannoversche zeitung , defended rhousopoulos, pointing out that the alleged remarks could not be securely attributed to him, and accusing gosrau of "a complete lack of tact" and "unwarranted arrogance." [ 25 ] during his first informal exhibition of the finds from troy at his house on mouson street in athens in 1873, [ 26 ] [ c ] schliemann invited all of athens to visit, so that they could, in his words, "convince themselves with their own eyes of the atrocious calumnies" of rhousopoulos, to whom he referred as "that foul fiend." [ 24 ] modern scholarship considers schliemann's 'treasure of priam' to date to the early bronze age [ 27 ] ( c. 3100 – c. 2000 bce [ 28 ] ), several centuries earlier than the putative date of the mythical priam's reign as king of troy ( c. 1250 bce ). [ 29 ] [ d ] in 1879, rhousopoulos examined a key that schliemann had found at troy, writing him what schliemann described as "a valuable note" on its design and the symbolism of its decoration. [ 31 ] galanakis has called rhousopoulos "the most important greek collector and dealer between the 1860s and 1890s". [ 2 ] in 1873, his collection was described by the german scholar friedrich wieseler as among the most remarkable in greece, second only to that of the russian consul-general peter alexandrovich saburov – which, according to the archaeological historian angeliki kokkou, "exceeded the limits and possibilities of a private collection". [ 32 ] rhousopoulos was particularly noted for his numismatic collection of ancient coins, [ 33 ] which numbered over 6,000 objects by 1874. [ 34 ] saburov moved his collection to berlin in 1880, and had sold it by 1884; [ 35 ] in 1885, the austrian consul in corfu , alexander von warsberg , described rhousopoulos's collection as the richest in athens. [ 34 ] rhousopoulos was registered as an art dealer until 1893, though it is unclear when he began to practise. [ 37 ] by the early 1870s, his collection included 3,000 neolithic stone tools , including two complete stone axes . between 1873 and 1874, rhousopoulos unsuccessfully tried to sell his stone artefacts for £120 (equivalent to £12,027 in 2021) to george rolleston , professor of anatomy and physiology at oxford university . [ 38 ] rolleston did, however, purchase an assemblage of bones and artefacts from rhousopoulos in 1871, paying a total of 475 francs (around £19, equivalent to £1,882 in 2021). the assemblage included seven ancient skulls, [ 12 ] which rolleston wanted for his phrenological research into the ancestral links between the modern and ancient populations of greece. [ 39 ] rolleston ordered another skull from rhousopoulos in 1873, and donated all eight to oxford university's ashmolean museum in 1874. [ 40 ] between these two purchases, rhousopoulos and rolleston maintained what galanakis has called "an amicable correspondence". rolleston travelled to athens to view rhousopoulos's antiquities in his home, and rhousopoulos travelled to oxford to visit rolleston in his. [ 41 ] rhousopoulos's collection and dealership made him a fixture of athenian high society. an 1884 guidebook to athens, produced by the british publisher john murray , listed rhousopoulos's collection as a must-see for archaeologically minded visitors to athens. rhousopoulos opened his house to invited viewers between 2pm and 5pm each day, and offered any item for sale, though commentators noted that his prices were considerably higher than those charged by other dealers in athens, london and paris. [ 12 ] his home was often visited by high-status foreign travellers, including emperor pedro ii of brazil in 1876 and empress elisabeth of austria in 1891. [ 42 ] rhousopoulos sold several items to major european and american museums, including london's british museum . in the early 1870s, he sold sixty-two gems, which he identified as "graeco- phoenician ", for £240 (equivalent to £24,054 in 2021) to charles newton , then keeper of the museum's greek and roman antiquities. later, in 1884, he sold four tanagra figurines to the museum for a total of £760 (equivalent to £76,170 in 2021), two of which were later found to be forgeries . [ e ] the following year, having spent two years negotiating with rhousopoulos over its price, the museum bought from him a mirror with a scene of the goddess nike sacrificing a bull, paying 80,000 francs (around £320, equivalent to £32,071 in 2021). [ 45 ] he may have played a significant role in the trade in ancient pinakia (voting-plates), [ 46 ] of which only a handful have survived to modern times. [ 47 ] on 30 august [ o.s. 18 august] 1871, he purchased one such pinakion that had been illegally excavated from a tomb at profitis ilias, near the panathenaic stadium : [ 48 ] galanakis has suggested that rhousopoulos may have been involved in the sale of many other pinakia now found in european museum collections. [ 46 ] rhousopoulos is the only athenian art dealer who can be definitively placed as supplying cretan seal-stones to arthur evans, keeper of the ashmolean museum, [ 49 ] who collected these objects as part of his early studies into the minoan writing systems later known as cretan hieroglyphs and linear a . [ 50 ] galanakis has suggested that evans may have purchased further stones from jean lambros, a rival dealer to rhousopoulos. [ 49 ] in 1888, rhousopoulos sold twenty-one vases, terracotta statues and bronze statues to the american philanthropist jane stanford , which would form part of the early collection of the stanford university museum of art . [ 51 ] rhousopoulos died in athens on 13 december [ o.s. 1 december] 1898. [ 23 ] his numismatic collection, described in 2008 by the numismatist alan s. walker as "truly encyclopaedic", was sold in 1905 by the munich auctioneer jacob hirsch. hirsch divided the collection into 4,627 individual lots, producing what walker describes as "the largest and best illustrated auction catalogue to have appeared up to that time" to accompany the auction. though hirsch did not name rhousopoulos as the previous owner of the coins, his identity was an open secret among many of the buyers. [ 52 ] other objects from rhousopoulos's collection were purchased by collectors and museums around the world, including several potsherds – of minimal commercial value – which are, as of 2013 [update] , held by the antikenmuseum [ de ] of heidelberg university . [ 53 ] the archaeological historian nikolaos papazarkadas has written that rhousopoulos "was heavily involved in dubious transactions involving illegally-excavated antiquities". [ 54 ] rhousopoulos once opined, in 1861, that the greek nation had "no need of new antiquities", but rather to catalogue and protect those "scattered in every corner of the city [of athens]" – which, he claimed, were "wearing out, disappearing, and being stolen." [ 55 ] the archaeologist helen hughes-brock has written that rhousopoulos had some connection with the illegal excavation of a chamber tomb at kara on mount hymettus on crete. [ 56 ] some time before 1896, he paid forty drachmae to georgios ghiouroukis, an excavator from the cycladic island of melos , to carry out an illegal excavation in the southwest part of the site of phylakopi , [ 57 ] searching for obsidian tools. the excavation was halted by the authorities after three days; [ 40 ] ghiouroukis later called this the "best day's pay that had ever been earned in melos in the memory of man". [ f ] [ 59 ] in a letter to rolleston, rhousopoulos boasted of being able to call upon "all the athens grave-diggers ( greek : τυμβωρύχοι , romanized : tymborychoi , lit. 'grave-diggers') [ g ] who dig for tombs throughout attica ". [ 62 ] in 1896, the numismatist ioannis svoronos wrote a pamphlet, entitled light upon archaeological scandals ( φως επί των αρχαιολογικών σκανδάλων ), in which he accused rhousopoulos of being an "antiquities looter" ( greek : αρχαιοκάπηλος , romanized : archaiokapilos , lit. 'antiquities trader'); [ 63 ] [ h ] as part of a broader set of accusations that the ephor general, panagiotis kavvadias , [ i ] had failed to address antiquities crime and been inappropriately friendly towards archaeological criminals. [ j ] [ 69 ] rhousopoulos sued svoronos for libel in response. [ 70 ] in 1862, rhousopoulos published an article in the journal of the german archaeological institute at rome [ de ] on a corinthian aryballos , now known as the aineta aryballos , which had been excavated in athens. [ 71 ] this article was possibly the first on epigraphical matters written by any greek in a foreign journal. [ 54 ] rhousopoulos sold the aryballos to the british museum for 1,000 drachmae in 1865, [ 72 ] via charles merlin , a british banker and diplomat resident in athens who often acted as an intermediary for antiquities purchases. charles newton had previously selected the aryballos for purchase, and subsequently received it from merlin. [ 73 ] in 1865, efstratiadis, by this point the ephor general in charge of the greek archaeological service , [ k ] had written in his diary of the size and richness of rhousopoulos's antiquities collection, marking the first time that rhousopoulos's activities had come to official attention. [ 75 ] the main law governing antiquities was the archaeological law of 22 may [ o.s. 10 may] 1834, which has been described as "loosely interpreted and even more loosely enforced". [ 76 ] under the 1834 law, private excavators – often known as "grave-robbers" [ 77 ] – required the permission of the ephor general to excavate, but he was required to grant that authorisation if the excavation took place on private land and had the landowner's consent. [ 78 ] furthermore, antiquities discovered in such excavations were considered the joint property of the state and the private excavators, [ 79 ] and would be shared between the landowners and the excavators. [ 80 ] such artefacts could be sold overseas, provided that their owners secured the judgement of a state committee of three experts that the object was "useless" to greek museums. rhousopoulos failed to secure this permission, but wrote to defend himself in the newspaper elpis ( ελπις ) on 16 february [ o.s. 4 february] 1867, arguing that the aryballos was "of no artistic value, the size of an apple, only valued for 25 drachmae". [ 75 ] efstratiadis, meanwhile, denounced rhousopoulos as a "university professor; antiquities looter". [ 81 ] efstratiadis's ability to respond to rhousopoulos's breach of the law was limited: the state had limited financial, human and legal resources to address the illegal excavation and trade of antiquities, and his superiors in government had little political will to do so. [ 82 ] he also needed to maintain good relations with athens's art dealers, who undertook more excavations in this period than either the archaeological service or the closely-aligned archaeological society of athens, and usually offered to sell the artefacts they uncovered to the state. [ 83 ] furthermore, rhousopoulos was periodically a member of the appraising committee of three, and often acted as a consultant to it, further limiting efstratiadis's ability to use the state's archaeological apparatus against him. [ 77 ] rhousopoulos was, however, fined 1,000 drachmae (the same as the price for which he had sold the aryballos ) later in 1867 for exporting antiquities without the ephor general's permission. [ 84 ] his actions were condemned by the minister for education and religious affairs, who oversaw the archaeological service, [ 84 ] and by the archaeological society of athens, which expelled him at some point in the 1870s. [ 2 ] according to galanakis and the archaeological historian magalosia nowak-kemp, rhousopoulos subsequently "went to great lengths" to operate outside the knowledge and scrutiny of the state. [ 84 ] for instance, he asked evans, to whom he had sold numerous gems and seal-stones [ 85 ] over a period of years, to ensure that his name was not mentioned in any publication involving the objects or their excavation. when the presence of these artefacts in oxford became known in 1894, the greek newspaper hestia ( ἑστία ) expressed its bafflement as to how such objects had left greece, [ 86 ] and other parts of the greek press criticised evans for his purchases. [ 87 ] rhousopoulos married the german louisa murray, whom he had met while a student at göttingen. murray's family were of scottish descent and may have migrated to germany around the time of the 1707 acts of union between scotland and england. [ 4 ] they had nine children. one of their daughters died in 1897; they had four other daughters — agnes, sophia, bertha and martha — and four sons: othon [ el ] , asterios, roussos and petros. [ 23 ] according to galanakis and nowak-kemp, murray likely assisted rhousopoulos in writing letters in english, which he did only rarely. [ 42 ] othon, born in 1856, became a chemist at the national archaeological museum, and has been credited as one of the most important figures in the early history of archaeological conservation . [ 88 ] roussos, meanwhile, was born in 1854 and became the modern greek tutor of empress elisabeth of austria; he visited corfu with her in 1889. in march 1891, elisabeth appointed him as professor of greek language at the orientalischen handelsakademie in budapest , and he later became professor of greek at the university of budapest , serving until the end of the first world war and dying in 1954. [ 37 ] after his death, rhousopoulos became the father-in-law of the german classical archaeologist ernst pfuhl , who married sophia rhousopoulos in 1904. [ 89 ] the two met while pfuhl was excavating on the cycladic island of thera . [ 90 ] sophia may also have sent impressions of some cretan seal-stones to arthur evans, who received impressions of examples in her father's collection after rhousopoulos's death. [ 91 ] rhousopoulos was known to be cosmopolitan, multilingual and well-connected in european society, particularly in german-speaking countries. [ 42 ] stefanos koumanoudis , his contemporary in the archaeological society of athens, and fellow professor (of latin) at the university of athens, described rhousopoulos in 1846 as "antiquities-mad" ( αρχαιομανής ). [ 75 ] rhousopoulos defended his sale of greek antiquities as a way of protecting greek heritage and promoting its standing abroad – a view contested by the archaeological society and by koumanoudis, [ 75 ] who co-authored a pamphlet in 1872 with philippos ioannou , the society's president, calling on greeks to use their "intelligence and patriotism" by refraining from looting or exporting antiquities. [ 92 ] rhousopoulos was elected as a member of the académie française , to whom he dedicated his book treatise on an icon of antigone ( πραγματείαν περὶ εἰκόνος τῆς ᾿αντιγόνης ). [ 10 ] papazarkadas has described rhousopoulos as "a competent philologist" and judged that "his epigraphical publications were as good as any studies of the mid-nineteenth century." [ 54 ] according to galanakis and nowak-kemp, rhousopoulos was unusual among athenian art dealers of his time for his "academic approach", by which he attempted to impress the archaeological importance of his wares upon his potential buyers, using his knowledge of the archaeological literature and debates of the day. [ 93 ] hughes-brock has described him as "a key figure in the early days of archaeology in greece", [ 3 ] while galanakis has described him as a "founding father" of athens's national archaeological museum. [ 2 ] rhousopoulos's detailed notes on the excavations with which he was connected – often unpublished and unmentioned in the academic archaeological press, given their informal and often illegal nature – have allowed the reconstruction of several of these excavations, including early digs in the kerameikos cemetery. his extensive correspondence, particularly with rolleston, has also been used to reconstruct the networks and dynamics of the trade in and collection of ancient artefacts in late nineteenth-century athens. [ 94 ]

terrance stanley fox (july 28, 1958 – june 28, 1981) was a canadian athlete, humanitarian, and cancer research activist. in 1980, having had one leg amputated due to cancer, he embarked on a cross-canada run to raise money and awareness for cancer research. the annual terry fox run , first held in 1981, has grown to involve millions of participants in over 60 countries and is the world's largest one-day fundraiser for cancer research; over c$900 million has been raised in his name through the terry fox research institute as of september 2024. [ 1 ] fox was a distance runner and basketball player for port coquitlam senior secondary school , later named after him, and simon fraser university . his right leg was amputated in 1977 after he was diagnosed with osteosarcoma , though he continued to run using an artificial leg. he also played wheelchair basketball in vancouver, winning three national championships. in 1980, he began the marathon of hope to raise money for cancer research. he hoped to raise one dollar from each of canada's 24 million people at the time. he began with little fanfare from st john's, newfoundland and labrador , in april that year, and ran the equivalent of a full marathon every day. fox had become a national star by the time he reached ontario ; he made numerous public appearances with businessmen, athletes, and politicians in his efforts to raise money. he was forced to end his run outside thunder bay after the cancer spread to his lungs. fox died nine months later on june 28, 1981. fox was the youngest person named a companion of the order of canada and won the 1980 lou marsh award as the nation's top sportsman. he was named canada's newsmaker of the year in both 1980 and 1981 by the canadian press . considered a national hero, he has had many buildings, statues, roads, and parks named in his honour across the country. terrance stanley fox was born on july 28, 1958, in winnipeg , manitoba, to rolland and betty fox . rolland was a switchman for the canadian national railway . [ 2 ] fox spent his childhood in the transcona suburb of winnipeg, where he attended wayoata elementary school . [ 3 ] fox had an elder brother, fred, a younger brother, darrell, and a younger sister, judith. [ 4 ] fox's maternal grandmother is métis and fox's younger brother darrell has official métis status. [ 5 ] his family moved to surrey in british columbia in 1966, then settled in port coquitlam in 1968. [ 4 ] he had doting parents, [ 6 ] and his father recalled that fox was extremely competitive. [ 7 ] fox attempted to join his school's basketball team, though struggled because of his height. his coach suggested that fox try cross-country running, which fox did in order to impress his coach. [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] fox continued to improve on his basketball skills, and in grade 12 he won his high school's athlete of the year award. [ 4 ] fox was unsure whether he wanted to go to university, but fox's mother convinced him to enrol at simon fraser university . he studied kinesiology with the intention of becoming a physical education teacher. [ 11 ] he was also a member of the junior varsity basketball team. [ 4 ] on november 12, 1976, fox was driving to the family home in port coquitlam when he was distracted by nearby bridge construction and crashed into the back of a pickup truck. fox injured his right knee in the crash and felt pain in december, but chose to ignore it until the end of basketball season. [ 12 ] by march 1977, the pain had intensified and he went to a hospital, where he was diagnosed with osteosarcoma , a form of cancer that often starts near the knees. [ 4 ] fox believed his car accident weakened his knee and left it vulnerable to the disease, though his doctors argued there was no connection. [ 13 ] he was told that his leg had to be amputated, he would require chemotherapy treatment, and that recent medical advances meant he had a 50-per cent chance of survival. fox learned that two years before, the figure would have been only 15 per cent; the improvement in survival rates impressed on him the value of cancer research. [ 14 ] with the help of an artificial leg, fox was walking three weeks after the amputation. [ 4 ] doctors were impressed with fox's positive outlook, saying it contributed to his rapid recovery. [ 15 ] fox endured sixteen months of chemotherapy and found the time he spent in the british columbia cancer control agency facility difficult as he watched fellow cancer patients suffer and die from the disease. [ 16 ] in the summer of 1977, rick hansen , working with the canadian wheelchair sports association, invited fox to try out for his wheelchair basketball team. [ 17 ] less than two months after learning how to play the sport, fox was named a member of the team for the national championship in edmonton, alberta . [ 18 ] he won three national titles with the team, [ 4 ] and was named an all-star by the north american wheelchair basketball association in 1980. [ 19 ] the night before his cancer surgery, fox had been given an article about dick traum , the first amputee to complete the new york city marathon . [ 4 ] the article inspired him; he embarked on a 14-month training program, telling his family he planned to compete in a marathon himself. [ 2 ] in private, he devised a more extensive plan. his hospital experiences had made fox angry at how little money was dedicated to cancer research. he intended to run the length of canada in the hope of increasing cancer awareness, a goal he initially divulged only to his friend douglas alward. [ 20 ] fox ran with an unusual gait, as he was required to hop-step on his good leg due to the extra time the springs in his artificial leg required to reset after each step. [ 21 ] he found the training painful as the additional pressure he had to place on both his good leg and his stump led to bone bruises, blisters, and intense pain. fox found that after about 20 minutes of each run, he crossed a pain threshold and the run became easier. [ 22 ] on september 2, 1979, fox competed in a 17-mile (27 km) road race in prince george . he finished in last place, ten minutes behind his closest competitor, but his effort was met with tears and applause from the other participants. [ 4 ] following the marathon, he revealed his full plan to his family. [ 23 ] his mother discouraged him, angering fox, though she later came to support the project. she recalled, "he said, 'i thought you'd be one of the first persons to believe in me.' and i wasn't. i was the first person who let him down". [ 24 ] fox initially hoped to raise $1 million, [ 24 ] then $10 million, but later sought to raise $1 for each of canada's 24 million citizens. [ 25 ] on october 15, 1979, fox sent a letter to the canadian cancer society in which he announced his goal and appealed for funding. he stated that he would "conquer" his disability, and promised to complete his run, even if he had to "crawl every last mile". explaining why he wanted to raise money for research, fox described his personal experience of cancer treatment: i soon realized that that would only be half my quest, for as i went through the 16 months of the physically and emotionally draining ordeal of chemotherapy, i was rudely awakened by the feelings that surrounded and coursed through the cancer clinic. there were faces with the brave smiles, and the ones who had given up smiling. there were feelings of hopeful denial, and the feelings of despair. my quest would not be a selfish one. i could not leave knowing these faces and feelings would still exist, even though i would be set free from mine. somewhere the hurting must stop ... and i was determined to take myself to the limit for this cause. [ 26 ] fox closed his letter with the statement: "we need your help. the people in cancer clinics all over the world need people who believe in miracles. i am not a dreamer, and i am not saying that this will initiate any kind of definitive answer or cure to cancer. i believe in miracles. i have to." [ 26 ] the cancer society was skeptical of his success but agreed to support fox once he had acquired sponsors and requested he get a medical certificate from a heart specialist stating that he was fit to attempt the run. fox was diagnosed with left ventricular hypertrophy – an enlarged heart – a condition commonly associated with athletes. doctors warned fox of the potential risks he faced, though they did not consider his condition a significant concern. they endorsed his participation when he promised that he would stop immediately if he began to experience any heart problems. [ 27 ] a second letter was sent to several corporations seeking donations for a vehicle and running shoes, and to cover the other costs of the run. [ 28 ] fox sent other letters asking for grants to buy a running leg. [ 28 ] the ford motor company donated a camper van, [ 6 ] while imperial oil contributed fuel, and adidas his running shoes. [ 29 ] fox turned away any company that requested he endorse their products and refused any donation that carried conditions, as he insisted that nobody was to profit from his run. [ 6 ] the marathon began on april 12, 1980, when fox dipped his right leg in the atlantic ocean near st. john's, newfoundland and labrador , and filled two large bottles with ocean water. he intended to keep one as a souvenir and pour the other into the pacific ocean upon completing his journey at victoria, british columbia . [ 25 ] fox was supported on his run by doug alward, who drove the van and cooked meals. [ 29 ] fox was met with gale-force winds, heavy rain, and a snowstorm in the first days of his run. [ 2 ] he was initially disappointed with the reception he received but was heartened upon arriving in channel-port aux basques , newfoundland and labrador, where the town's 10,000 residents presented him with a donation of over $10,000. [ 29 ] throughout the trip, fox frequently expressed his anger and frustration to those he saw as impeding the run, and he fought regularly with alward. when they reached nova scotia , they were barely on speaking terms, and it was arranged for fox's brother darrell, then 17, to join them as a buffer. [ 24 ] fox left the maritimes on june 10 and faced new challenges upon entering quebec due to his group's inability to speak french [ 30 ] and drivers who continually forced him off the road. [ 31 ] fox arrived in montreal on june 22, one-third of the way through his 8,000-kilometre (5,000 mi) journey, having collected over $200,000 in donations. [ 21 ] fox's run caught the attention of isadore sharp , the founder and ceo of four seasons hotels and resorts , who lost a son to melanoma in 1978 just a year after terry's diagnosis. [ 32 ] sharp gave food and accommodation at his hotels to fox's team. when fox was discouraged because so few people were making donations, sharp pledged $2 a mile and persuaded close to 1,000 other corporations to do the same. [ 33 ] fox was convinced by the canadian cancer society that arriving in ottawa for canada day would aid fundraising efforts, so he remained in montreal for a few extra days. [ 31 ] fox crossed into ontario on the last saturday in june, and he was met by a brass band and thousands of residents who lined the streets to cheer him on, while the ontario provincial police gave him an escort throughout the province. [ 34 ] despite the sweltering heat of summer, he continued to run 26 miles (42 km) per day. [ 30 ] on his arrival in ottawa , fox met governor general ed schreyer , prime minister pierre trudeau , and was the guest of honour at numerous sporting events in the city. [ 34 ] in front of over 16,000 fans, he performed a ceremonial kickoff at a canadian football league game between the ottawa rough riders and saskatchewan roughriders , [ 35 ] and was given a standing ovation. fox's journal reflected his growing excitement at the reception he had received. [ 36 ] on july 11, fox arrived in toronto where a crowd of 10,000 people met him and he was honoured in nathan phillips square . [ 37 ] as he ran to the square, he was joined on the road by many people, including national hockey league star darryl sittler , who presented fox with his 1980 all-star game jersey. the cancer society estimated it collected $100,000 in donations that day alone. [ 4 ] that evening he threw the ceremonial first pitch at exhibition stadium preceding a baseball game between the toronto blue jays and the cleveland indians . as he continued through southern ontario, he was met by hockey hall of fame hockey player bobby orr who presented him with a cheque for $25,000. fox considered meeting orr the highlight of his journey. [ 4 ] as fox's fame grew, the cancer society scheduled him to attend more functions and give more speeches. [ 38 ] fox attempted to accommodate any request that he believed would raise money, no matter how far out of his way it took him. [ 39 ] he bristled, however, at what he felt were media intrusions into his personal life, for example when the toronto star reported that he had gone on a date. [ 40 ] fox was left unsure whom he could trust in the media after negative articles began to emerge, including one by the globe and mail that highlighted tensions with his brother darrell and claimed he was running because he held a grudge against a doctor who had misdiagnosed his condition, allegations he referred to as "trash". [ 41 ] [ 42 ] the physical demands of running a marathon every day took their toll on fox's body. apart from the rest days in montreal taken at the request of the cancer society, he refused to take a day off, even on his 22nd birthday. [ 43 ] he frequently had shin splints and an inflamed knee . he developed cysts on his stump and experienced dizzy spells. [ 44 ] at one point, he had a soreness in his ankle that would not go away. although he feared he had developed a stress fracture, he ran for three more days before seeking medical attention, and was then relieved to learn it was tendonitis and could be treated with painkillers. [ 45 ] fox rejected calls for him to seek regular medical checkups, [ 46 ] and dismissed suggestions he was risking his future health. [ 41 ] by late august, fox described that he was exhausted before he began the day's run. [ 47 ] on september 1, outside thunder bay, he was forced to stop briefly after he had an intense coughing fit and experienced pains in his chest. he resumed running as the crowds along the highway shouted out their encouragement. [ 48 ] a few miles later, short of breath and with continued chest pain, he asked alward to drive him to a hospital. [ 49 ] the next day, fox held a tearful press conference during which he announced that his cancer had returned and spread to his lungs. he was forced to end his run after 143 days and 5,373 kilometres (3,339 mi). [ 50 ] fox refused offers to complete the run in his stead, stating that he wanted to complete his marathon himself. [ 4 ] fox had raised $1.7 million (equivalent to $6 million in 2023) when he was forced to abandon the marathon. [ 51 ] a week after his run ended, the ctv television network organized a nationwide telethon in support of fox and the canadian cancer society. [ 52 ] supported by canadian and international celebrities, the five-hour event raised $10.5 million (equivalent to $37 million in 2023). [ 4 ] among the donations were $1 million each by the governments of british columbia and ontario, the former to create a new research institute to be founded in fox's name and the latter an endowment given to the ontario cancer treatment and research foundation. [ 53 ] donations continued throughout the winter, and by april over $23 million had been raised (equivalent to $73 million in 2023). [ 54 ] supporters and well-wishers from around the world inundated fox with letters and tokens of support. at one point, he was receiving more mail than the rest of port coquitlam combined. [ 55 ] such was his fame that one letter sent from the united states addressed simply to "terry fox, canada" was successfully delivered. [ 56 ] in september 1980, fox was invested in a special ceremony as a companion of the order of canada ; he was, and remains, the youngest person to be so honoured. [ 57 ] [ 58 ] the lieutenant governor of british columbia named him to the order of the dogwood , the province's highest award. [ 59 ] canada's sports hall of fame commissioned a permanent exhibit, [ 60 ] and fox was named the winner of the lou marsh award for 1980 as the nation's top athlete. [ 61 ] he was named canada's 1980 newsmaker of the year . the ottawa citizen described the national response to his marathon as "one of the most powerful outpourings of emotion and generosity in canada's history". [ 62 ] in the following months, fox received multiple chemotherapy treatments, but the disease continued to spread. [ 63 ] as his condition worsened, canadians hoped for a miracle and pope john paul ii sent a telegram saying that he was praying for fox. [ 64 ] doctors turned to experimental interferon treatments, though their effectiveness against osteogenic sarcoma was unknown. [ 65 ] he had an adverse reaction to his first treatment, [ 66 ] but continued the program after a period of rest. [ 67 ] fox was re-admitted to the royal columbian hospital in new westminster on june 19, 1981, with chest congestion and developed pneumonia . [ 68 ] he fell into a coma and died at 4:35 a.m. pdt on june 28, 1981. [ 69 ] [ 70 ] the government of canada ordered flags across the country lowered to half mast, an unprecedented honour that was usually reserved for statesmen. [ 71 ] addressing the house of commons , trudeau said, "it occurs very rarely in the life of a nation that the courageous spirit of one person unites all people in the celebration of his life and in the mourning of his death ... we do not think of him as one who was defeated by misfortune but as one who inspired us with the example of the triumph of the human spirit over adversity". [ 72 ] his funeral in port coquitlam was attended by 40 relatives and 200 guests, [ 72 ] and broadcast on national television. hundreds of communities across canada also held memorial services, [ 73 ] a public memorial service was held on parliament hill in ottawa, [ 74 ] and canadians again overwhelmed cancer society offices with donations. [ 75 ] fox is buried at port coquitlam municipal cemetery. [ 76 ] fox remains a prominent figure in canadian folklore. his determination united the nation; people from all walks of life lent their support to his run and his memory inspires pride in all regions of the country. [ 77 ] a 1999 national survey named him as canada's greatest hero, [ 78 ] and he finished second to tommy douglas in the 2004 canadian broadcasting corporation program the greatest canadian . [ 79 ] fox's heroic status has been attributed to his image as an ordinary person attempting a remarkable and inspirational feat. [ 80 ] [ 81 ] others have argued that fox's greatness derives from his audacious vision, his determined pursuit of his goal, his ability to overcome challenges such as his lack of experience and the very loneliness of his venture. [ 80 ] [ 82 ] as fox's advocate on the greatest canadian , media personality sook-yin lee compared him to a classic hero, phidippides , the runner who delivered the news of the battle of marathon before dying, and asserted that fox "embodies the most cherished canadian values: compassion, commitment, perseverance". she highlighted the juxtaposition between his celebrity, brought about by the unforgettable image he created, and his rejection of the trappings of that celebrity. [ 83 ] typically amongst canadian icons, fox is an unconventional hero, admired but not without flaws. [ 84 ] an obituary in the canadian family physician emphasized his humanity and noted that his anger – at his diagnosis, at press misrepresentations and at those he saw as encroaching on his independence – spoke against ascribing sainthood for fox, and thus placed his achievements within the reach of all. [ 80 ] fox refused to regard himself as disabled, [ 85 ] and would not allow anyone to pity him, telling a toronto radio station that he found life more "rewarding and challenging" since he had lost his leg. [ 80 ] his feat helped redefine canadian views of disability and the inclusion of disabled people in society. [ 86 ] [ 87 ] fox's actions increased the visibility of people with disabilities, [ 87 ] [ 88 ] and influenced the attitudes of those with disabilities by showing disability portrayed in a positive light. [ 87 ] rick hansen commented that the run challenged society to focus on ability rather than disability, writing, "what was perceived as a limitation became a great opportunity. people with disabilities started looking at things differently. they came away with huge pride". [ 89 ] the narrative surrounding fox has been critiqued as illustrating the media's focus on stereotyped portrayals of the heroic and extraordinary achievements of people with disabilities, rather than more mundane accomplishments. [ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] actor alan toy noted "sure, it raised money for cancer research and sure it showed the human capacity for achievement. but a lot of disabled people are made to feel like failures if they haven't done something extraordinary. they may be bankers or factory workers – proof enough of their usefulness to society. do we have to be 'supercrips' in order to be valid? and if we're not super, are we invalid?" [ 90 ] the media's idealization of fox has also been critiqued for emphasizing an individualistic approach to illness and disability, in which the body is a machine to be mastered, rather than the social model of disability where societal attitudes and barriers to inclusion play a prominent role in determining who is disabled. [ 93 ] [ 94 ] during fox's marathon, sharp proposed an annual fundraising run in fox's name; fox agreed, but insisted that the runs be non-competitive and include any who wanted to participate. [ 95 ] sharp faced opposition to the project: the cancer society feared that a fall run would detract from its traditional april campaigns, while other charities believed that an additional fundraiser would leave less money for their causes. [ 96 ] sharp persisted, and he, the four seasons hotels and the fox family organized the first terry fox run on september 13, 1981. [ 95 ] over 300,000 people took part and raised $3.5 million in the first terry fox run. [ 97 ] schools across canada were urged to join the second run, held on september 19, 1982. [ 98 ] school participation has continued since, evolving into the national school run day. [ 99 ] the runs, which raised over $20 million in their first six years, [ 96 ] grew into an international event as over one million people in 60 countries took part in 1999, raising $15 million that year alone. [ 100 ] by the terry fox run's 25th anniversary, more than three million people were taking part annually. grants from the terry fox foundation, which organizes the runs, have helped canadian scientists make numerous advances in cancer research. [ 101 ] the terry fox run is the world's largest one-day fundraiser for cancer research, [ 102 ] and over $850 million has been raised in his name as of may 2022 [update] . [ 103 ] the physical memorials in canada named after fox include: [ 104 ] shortly after his death, fox was named the newsmaker of the year for 1981, [ 113 ] and canada post announced the production of a commemorative stamp in 1981, bypassing its traditionally held position that stamps honouring people should not be created until ten years after their deaths. [ 114 ] british rock star rod stewart was so moved by the marathon of hope that he was inspired to write and dedicate the song "never give up on a dream" – found on his 1981 album tonight i'm yours – to fox. stewart also called his 1981–1982 tour of canada the "terry fox tour". [ 115 ] in 1982 the groundwork was laid for the terry fox canadian youth centre, a residential hostel in ottawa for high school students to come from across canada to spend a week learning about the country. it was set up by the canadian unity council ; [ 116 ] the programme later became known as encounters with canada [ 117 ] and the building was renamed the historica canada centre. in 2012, fox was posthumously inducted into the canadian medical hall of fame in the builder category in recognition of his public service in the name of research fundraising. [ 118 ] the terry fox hall of fame was established in 1994 to recognize individuals that have made contributions that improved the quality of life of disabled people. [ 108 ] [ 119 ] the terry fox laboratory research centre was established in vancouver to conduct leading edge research into the causes and potential cures for cancer. [ citation needed ] in 2005, the royal canadian mint issued a special dollar coin designed by stanley witten to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the marathon of hope. [ 120 ] [ 121 ] it was their first regular circulation coin to feature a canadian. [ 122 ] in 2008, fox was named a national historic person of canada , a recognition given by the canadian government to those persons who are considered to have played a nationally significant role in the history of the country. fox's designation was due to his status as an "enduring icon", his personal qualities, and for the manner in which the marathon of hope had captivated the country and resonated deeply with canadians. [ 123 ] fox's mother, betty fox , was one of eight people to carry the olympic flag into bc place stadium at the opening ceremonies of the 2010 winter olympics in vancouver. [ 124 ] the games saw the terry fox award bestowed on olympic athletes who embodied fox's characteristics of determination and humility in the face of adversity. [ 125 ] beginning in 2015, manitoba designated the first monday in august, formerly known as civic holiday , as terry fox day. [ 126 ] on september 13, 2020, google celebrated fox with a google doodle . [ 127 ] fox's story was dramatized in the 1983 biographical film the terry fox story . produced by home box office , the film aired as a television movie in the united states and had a theatrical run in canada. [ 128 ] the film starred amputee actor eric fryer and robert duvall , and was the first film made exclusively for pay television. [ 129 ] the movie received mixed but generally positive reviews, [ 128 ] but was criticized by fox's family over how it portrayed his temper. [ 130 ] the terry fox story was nominated for eight genie awards , and won five, including best picture and best actor . [ 131 ] rock musician ian thomas had written and recorded a song in response to fox's story, " runner ", which ended up being included in the film. it also was covered by manfred mann's earth band , reaching #22 on the billboard hot 100 and #34 in canada in 1984. [ 132 ] a second movie, titled terry , focused on the marathon of hope, was produced by the ctv television network in 2005. fox was portrayed by shawn ashmore . he is not an amputee; digital editing was used to superimpose a prosthesis over his real leg. the film was endorsed by fox's family, and portrayed his attitude more positively than the first movie. [ 130 ] canadian national basketball association star steve nash , who himself was inspired by fox when he was a child, directed a 2010 documentary into the wind , which aired on espn as part of its 30 for 30 series. [ 133 ] [ 134 ] fox's story was brought to the stage in 2016 in marathon of hope: the musical produced by drayton entertainment . fox was not the first person to attempt to run across canada. mark kent crossed the country in 1974 as he raised money for the canadian team at the 1976 summer olympics . [ 2 ] [ 135 ] while he lived, fox refused to let anyone else complete the marathon of hope, having promised to finish it himself once he recovered. [ 95 ] steve fonyo , an 18-year-old with the same form of cancer and who also had a leg amputated, sought in 1984 to duplicate fox's run, calling his effort the "journey for lives". [ 136 ] after leaving st. john's on march 31, fonyo reached the point where fox was forced to end his marathon at the end of november, [ 137 ] and completed the transcontinental run on may 29, 1985. [ 138 ] the journey for lives raised over $13 million for cancer research. [ 139 ] canadian paralympic athlete rick hansen , who had recruited fox to play on his wheelchair basketball team in 1977, was similarly inspired by the marathon of hope. [ 140 ] hansen, who first considered circumnavigating the globe in his wheelchair in 1974, began the man in motion world tour in 1985 with the goal of raising $10 million towards research into spinal cord injuries . [ 141 ] as fonyo had, hansen paused at the spot fox's run ended to honour the late runner. [ 105 ] hansen completed his world tour in may 1987 after 792 days and 40,073 kilometres (24,900 mi); [ 142 ] he travelled through 34 countries and raised over $26 million. [ 143 ] fox is shown in the 2013 rendering of the canadian passport . [ 144 ] in december 2024, fox was chosen to appear on a future issue of the canadian $5 bill . [ 145 ]

dr. jekyll and mr. hyde is a four-act play written by thomas russell sullivan in collaboration with the actor richard mansfield . it is an adaptation of strange case of dr jekyll and mr hyde , an 1886 novella by the scottish author robert louis stevenson . the story focuses on the respected london doctor henry jekyll and his involvement with edward hyde, a loathsome criminal. after hyde murders the father of jekyll's fiancée, jekyll's friends discover that jekyll and hyde are the same person; jekyll has developed a potion that allows him to transform himself into hyde and back again. when he runs out of the potion, he is trapped as hyde and commits suicide before he can be arrested. after reading the novella, mansfield was intrigued by the opportunity to play a dual role , having performed one in a different production. he secured the rights to adapt the story for the stage in the united states and the united kingdom, and asked sullivan to write the adaptation. the play debuted in boston in may 1887, and a revised version opened on broadway in september of that year. critics acclaimed mansfield's performance as the dual character. the play was popular in new york and on tour, and mansfield was invited to bring it to london. it opened there in august 1888, just before the first jack the ripper murders. some press reports compared the murderer to the jekyll–hyde character, and mansfield was suggested as a possible suspect. despite significant press coverage, the london production was a financial failure. mansfield's company continued to perform the play on tours of the u.s. until shortly before his death in 1907. in writing the stage adaptation, sullivan made several changes to the story; these included creating a fiancée for jekyll and a stronger moral contrast between jekyll and hyde. the changes have been adopted by many subsequent adaptations, including several film adaptations of the story derived from the play. the films included a 1912 adaptation directed by lucius henderson , a 1920 adaptation directed by john s. robertson , and a 1931 adaptation directed by rouben mamoulian , which earned fredric march an academy award for best actor . a 1941 adaptation , directed by victor fleming , was a remake of the 1931 film. in the first act, a group of friends (including sir danvers carew's daughter agnes, attorney gabriel utterson, and dr. and mrs. lanyon) meet at sir danvers' home. dr. lanyon brings word that agnes' fiancé, dr. henry jekyll, will be late to the gathering. he then repeats a second-hand story about a man named hyde, who injured a child in a collision on the street. the story upsets utterson because jekyll recently made a new will that gives his estate to a mysterious friend named edward hyde. jekyll arrives; utterson confronts him about the will, but jekyll refuses to consider changing it. jekyll tells agnes that they should end their engagement because of sins he has committed, but will not explain. agnes refuses to accept this and tells jekyll she loves him. he relents, saying that she will help him control himself, and leaves. sir danvers joins his daughter, and they talk about their time in mangalore , india. when hyde suddenly enters, sir danvers tells agnes to leave the room. the men argue, and hyde strangles sir danvers. in the second act, hyde fears that he will be arrested for the murder. he gives money to his landlady, rebecca, to tell visitors that he is not home. inspector newcome from scotland yard offers rebecca more money to turn hyde in, which she promises to do. hyde flees to jekyll's laboratory, where utterson is waiting to confront the doctor about his will; he insults utterson and leaves. rebecca, who has followed hyde, arrives and tells utterson that hyde murdered sir danvers. in the play's original version, the act ends with jekyll returning to his laboratory. in later versions (revised after its premiere), the second act contains an additional scene [ 1 ] in which jekyll returns home; his friends think he is protecting hyde. agnes, who saw hyde before her father was murdered, wants jekyll to accompany her to provide the police with a description, and is distraught when he refuses. in the third act, jekyll's servant, poole, gives dr. lanyon a powder and liquid with instructions from jekyll to give them to a person who will request them. while he waits, lanyon speaks with newcome, rebecca, agnes and mrs. lanyon. after the others leave, hyde arrives for the powder and liquid. after arguing with lanyon, he mixes them into a potion and drinks it; he immediately transforms into jekyll. in the final act, jekyll has begun to change into hyde without using the potion. although he still needs it to change back, he has exhausted his supply. dr. lanyon tries to help jekyll re-create the formula, but they are unable to find an ingredient. jekyll asks lanyon to bring agnes to him, but jekyll turns into hyde before lanyon returns. utterson and newcome arrive to arrest hyde; knowing he can no longer transform back into jekyll, hyde commits suicide by taking poison. the play was produced at the boston museum , broadway's madison square theatre and the lyceum theatre in london's west end with the following casts: [ 2 ] the scottish author robert louis stevenson wrote strange case of dr jekyll and mr hyde in 1885 when he was living in bournemouth , on england's south coast. [ 3 ] in january 1886 the novella was published in the united kingdom by longmans, green & co. and by charles scribner's sons in the united states, [ 4 ] where it was frequently pirated because of the lack of copyright protection in the us for works originally published in the uk. [ 5 ] in early 1887, actor richard mansfield read stevenson's novella and immediately decided to adapt it for the stage. mansfield was looking for material that would help him achieve a reputation as a serious actor in the us (where he resided) and in england (where he had spent most of his childhood). he had already played a father and son in a new york production of the operetta rip van winkle , [ 6 ] and he recognized playing jekyll and hyde would be another acting opportunity to play dual roles. [ 7 ] he thought the role was a theatrical novelty that would showcase his talents in a favorable way. [ 8 ] although us copyright law would have allowed him to produce an unauthorized adaptation, mansfield secured the american and british stage rights. while performing in boston, he asked a local friend, thomas russell sullivan, to write a script. [ 9 ] sullivan had previously only written in his spare time while working as a clerk for lee, higginson & co. , a boston investment bank. [ 10 ] although he doubted that the novella would make a good play, he agreed to help mansfield with the project, and they worked quickly to complete the adaptation before other, unauthorized versions could be staged. [ 9 ] after just two weeks of rehearsals, the play opened at the boston museum on may 9, 1887, as the first american adaptation of stevenson's novella. [ 11 ] [ a ] on may 14, it closed for rewrites. [ 14 ] the updated version opened at the madison square theatre on broadway on september 12. a. m. palmer produced and richard marston designed the sets for the production. sullivan invited stevenson, who had moved to the us that summer; stevenson was ill, but his wife and mother attended and congratulated sullivan on the play. [ 15 ] [ 16 ] the madison square production closed on october 1, when mansfield took his company on a nationwide tour. [ 17 ] the tour began at the chestnut street theatre in philadelphia [ 18 ] and visited over a dozen cities, including several returns to boston and new york. [ 19 ] it ended at the madison square theatre, where dr. jekyll and mr. hyde was performed for a final matinee of the season on june 29, 1888. [ 20 ] in march 1888, while mansfield's company was touring, daniel e. bandmann staged a competing production with the same name at niblo's garden . [ 21 ] bandmann's opening night (march 12) coincided with the great blizzard of 1888 , and only five theatergoers braved the storm. [ 22 ] one of the attendees was sullivan, who was checking his competition. [ 15 ] [ 16 ] bandmann's production inspired a letter from stevenson to the new york sun saying that only the mansfield version was authorized and paying him royalties . [ 23 ] the english actor henry irving saw mansfield's performance in new york and invited him to bring the play to london, where irving managed the lyceum theatre in the west end . although the play was scheduled to premiere in september 1888, mansfield discovered that bandmann planned to open his competing version in august, and he rushed to recall his company from vacation. [ 24 ] mansfield worked with irving and stevenson's publisher, longmans, to block bandmann's production and those of other competitors. [ 24 ] in the uk, unlike the us, the novella had copyright protection. longmans brought legal actions against the unauthorized versions; its efforts blocked a william howell poole production from opening at the theatre royal in croydon on july 26. that day, fred wright's company b presented one performance of its adaptation at the park theatre in merthyr tydfil before it was also closed. [ 25 ] bandmann had the opera comique theater reserved from august 6, but hoped to open his production earlier. [ 26 ] irving blocked this by reserving the theater for mansfield's rehearsals, and mansfield's dr. jekyll and mr. hyde opened at the lyceum on august 4. [ 24 ] bandmann went ahead with his august 6 opening, but after two performances the production was shut down because of legal action by longmans. [ 27 ] although irving attended some of mansfield's rehearsals, he did not remain in london for the opening. mansfield worked with irving's stage manager , h. j. lovejoy, and "acting manager" bram stoker (who would later write the horror novel dracula ) to stage the production. [ 28 ] he was dissatisfied with lovejoy's stagehands and complained to a friend, the drama critic william winter , that they were "slow" and "argumentative". [ 29 ] since the lyceum crew had staged many productions and had a good reputation, winter thought it more likely that they disliked mansfield. [ 28 ] [ 30 ] regardless of the crew's motives, mansfield became antagonistic toward irving during his time there. [ 31 ] [ 32 ] the lyceum production of dr. jekyll and mr. hyde was scheduled to close on september 29, after which mansfield intended to stage other plays. initially, he followed this plan, introducing productions of lesbia and a parisian romance at the beginning of october. however, mansfield soon reintroduced dr. jekyll and mr. hyde to his schedule and added performances between october 10 and october 20. [ 33 ] on august 7, 1888, three days after the lyceum opening of dr. jekyll and mr. hyde , martha tabram was discovered stabbed to death in london's whitechapel neighborhood. on august 31, mary ann nichols was found, murdered and mutilated, in the same neighborhood. press coverage linking these and other whitechapel murders of women created a furor in london. the public and police suspected that some or all of the murders were committed by one person, who became known as jack the ripper . some press reports compared the unidentified killer with the jekyll and hyde characters, suggesting that the ripper led a respectable life during the day and became a murderer at night. [ 34 ] [ 35 ] on october 5, the city of london police received a letter suggesting that mansfield should be considered a suspect. the letter writer, who had seen him perform as jekyll and hyde, thought that mansfield could easily disguise himself and commit the murders undetected. [ 36 ] mansfield attempted to defuse public concern by staging the london opening of the comedy prince karl as a charity performance, despite stoker's warning that critics would view it as an attempt to obtain favorable publicity for the production. [ 37 ] although some press reports suggested that mansfield stopped performing dr. jekyll and mr. hyde in london because of the murders, financial reasons are more likely. [ 38 ] despite widespread publicity due to the murders and mansfield's disputes with bandmann, attendance was mediocre, and the production was losing money. [ 39 ] on december 1, mansfield's tenancy at the lyceum ended. he left london, taking his company on a tour of england. in december they performed dr. jekyll and mr. hyde and other plays in liverpool and derby , then continued to other cities and performed other plays. [ 40 ] [ 41 ] when mansfield left the uk in june 1889, he was deeply in debt because of production losses there. [ 42 ] his debts included £2,675 owed to irving, which mansfield did not want to pay because he felt that irving had not supported him adequately at the lyceum. irving sued, winning the uk performance rights to dr. jekyll and mr. hyde , [ 43 ] and mansfield never performed in england again. [ 44 ] in the us, the play became part of the repertory of mansfield's company and was repeatedly performed during the 1890s and early 1900s. mansfield continued in the title role, and beatrice cameron continued to play jekyll's fiancée. the actors married in 1892. [ 45 ] in later years, he staged the play less often, after becoming fearful that something would go wrong during the transformation scenes. [ 46 ] from 1904 to 1907, the company performed the play at the new amsterdam theatre in new york, [ 47 ] where their final performance of it was staged on march 21, 1907. mansfield fell ill soon afterward, and he died on august 30 of that year. [ 48 ] the play was closely associated with mansfield's performance; a 1916 retrospective on adaptations of stevenson's works indicated that sullivan's dr. jekyll and mr. hyde was no longer performed after mansfield's death. [ 49 ] although irving obtained the uk performance rights, he never staged the play. his son, harry brodribb irving , produced a new adaptation by j. comyns carr in 1910. [ 50 ] by that time, more than a dozen other stage adaptations had appeared; [ 51 ] [ 52 ] the most significant was an 1897 adaptation by luella forepaugh and george f. fish, made available in 1904 for stock theater performances as dr. jekyll and mr. hyde, or a mis-spent life . [ 53 ] [ 54 ] although mansfield's transformations between jekyll and hyde included lighting changes and makeup designed to appear different under colored filters, it was mainly accomplished by the actor's facial contortions and changes in posture and movement. [ 55 ] [ 56 ] as hyde, mansfield was hunched over with a grimacing face and claw-like hands; he spoke with a guttural voice and walked differently than he did as jekyll. [ 57 ] [ 58 ] the effect was so dramatic that audiences and journalists speculated about how it was achieved. theories included claims that mansfield had an inflatable rubber prosthetic, that he applied chemicals, and that he had a mask hidden in a wig, which he pulled down to complete the change. [ 59 ] [ 60 ] mansfield denied such theories, emphasizing that he did not use any "mechanical claptrap" in his performance. [ 61 ] in contrast to the novella, in which the physical transformation of jekyll into hyde is revealed near the end, most dramatic adaptations show it early in the play, because the audience is familiar with the story. as one of its first adapters, sullivan worked in an environment where the transformation would still shock the audience, and he held the reveal until the third act. [ 62 ] there were several differences between sullivan's adaptation and stevenson's novella. stevenson used multiple narrators and a circular narrative (allowing material presented at the end to explain material presented at the beginning), but sullivan wrote a linear narrative in chronological order. [ 63 ] this linear approach and the onstage action conveyed a stronger impression of realism , eliminating uncertainties in stevenson's narrative. [ 64 ] although making the story more straightforward and less ambiguous was not necessary for a theatrical adaptation, sullivan's approach was typical of the era's stage melodramas and made the material more acceptable to audiences. [ 65 ] the stage presentation's realism also allowed sullivan to drop the novella's scientific aspects. although stevenson used science to make the jekyll–hyde transformation plausible to readers, sullivan could rely on the onstage transformations. [ 64 ] in the novella, the transformation is only presented via the account of lanyon, never as direct narration to the reader. [ 66 ] the playwright strengthened the contrast between jekyll and hyde compared to stevenson's original; sullivan's hyde was more explicitly evil, and his jekyll more conventional. in stevenson's novella jekyll is socially isolated and neurotic , and his motives for experimenting with the potion are ambiguous. [ 67 ] sullivan's adaptation changed these elements of the character. his jekyll is socially active and mentally healthy, and his motives for creating the potion are benign; [ 68 ] sullivan's jekyll tells lanyon that his discovery will "benefit the world". [ 69 ] later adaptations made further changes, representing jekyll as noble, religious or involved in charitable work. [ 70 ] mansfield's portrayal of jekyll is less stereotypically good than later versions, and he thought that making the characterizations too simplistic would hurt the play's dramatic quality. [ 71 ] sullivan's version added women to the story; there were no significant female characters in stevenson's original. the presence of women (especially jekyll's fiancée, agnes carew) placed jekyll in traditional social relationships, which made him seem more normal by contemporaneous standards. [ 63 ] [ 72 ] hyde behaved lecherously towards agnes and cruelly towards his landlady, and his behavior towards women in this and later adaptations led to new interpretations of the character. in stevenson's novella and sullivan's play, hyde is said to have committed unspecified crimes. interpreters began to identify the crimes as sexual, positing sexual repression as a factor in hyde's characterization. [ 73 ] however, stevenson denied that this was his understanding of the character in his original story; [ 74 ] he said hyde's immoralities were "cruelty and malice, and selfishness and cowardice", not sexual. [ 75 ] in some interpretations of the novella, the male characters represent patriarchal society, with hyde signifying its moral corruption. other interpretations suggest that the lack of female companionship for the male characters indicates their latent homosexuality and that hyde is engaged in homosexual activity. these interpretations are harder to apply to the play because of sullivan's addition of female characters and heterosexual relationships. [ 76 ] [ 77 ] mansfield and his american theatre company pronounced jekyll with a short e (/ ɛ /) instead of the long e (/ iː /) pronunciation stevenson intended. the short e pronunciation is now used in most adaptations. [ 78 ] reviewing the play's initial production at the boston museum, the boston post "warmly congratulated" sullivan on his script and said that it overcame the difficulties of turning stevenson's story into a drama with only a few flaws. mansfield's performance was praised for drawing a clear distinction between jekyll and hyde, although the reviewer found his portrayal of hyde better crafted than his portrayal of jekyll. audience reaction was enthusiastic, with long applause and several curtain calls for mansfield. [ 58 ] according to the cambridge tribune , the audience reaction affirmed "that the play and its production were a work of genius". [ 79 ] the broadway production also received positive reviews. [ 7 ] [ 80 ] when it opened at the madison square theatre, a new york times reviewer complimented mansfield for his acting and for overcoming the difficulty of presenting the story's allegorical material onstage. [ 81 ] according to a new-york daily tribune reviewer, mansfield gave excellent performances as jekyll and hyde despite a few technical production flaws. [ 82 ] a life review praised sullivan's adaptation, particularly his addition of a love interest for jekyll, and complimented the performances of mansfield, cameron and harkins. [ 83 ] the lyceum production received mixed reviews, complimenting mansfield's performance but criticizing the play as a whole. [ 39 ] a sunday times reviewer appreciated mansfield's performance as hyde and in the transformation scenes, but not as jekyll, and called the overall play "dismal and wearisome in the extreme". [ 84 ] according to a daily telegraph review, stevenson's story was unsuitable for drama and sullivan had not adapted it well, but the performances of mansfield and his company were praiseworthy. [ 85 ] a review in the saturday review criticized sullivan's adaptation, saying that it presented only one aspect of the jekyll character from stevenson's story. the reviewer complimented mansfield's acting, especially in the transformation scenes, but said that his performance could not salvage the play. [ 86 ] a review in the theatre said that the play itself was not good, but it was an effective showcase for mansfield's performance. [ 87 ] sharon aronofsky weltman summarizes the reception for mansfield's performance as being mostly critical of his presentation of jekyll, but universally positive about his performance as hyde and his handling of the transformation between the two personas. [ 88 ] dr. jekyll and mr. hyde was a milestone in the careers of sullivan and mansfield. sullivan left his banking job to become a full-time writer. he wrote three more plays (none successful), several novels, and a two-volume collection of short stories, many of which have gothic elements. sullivan attempted one more stage collaboration with mansfield, a drama about the roman emperor nero , but they became estranged after its failure. [ 89 ] for the actor, playing jekyll and hyde helped establish his reputation for dramatic roles; he had been known primarily for comedies. mansfield continued to struggle financially (in part because of his elaborate, expensive productions) [ 90 ] before he achieved financial stability in the mid-1890s with a string of successful tours and new productions. [ 91 ] as the most successful early adaptation of strange case of dr jekyll and mr hyde , sullivan's play influenced subsequent versions. later adaptations followed his simplification of the narrative, addition of women characters (especially a romance for jekyll) and highlighting of the moral contrast between jekyll and hyde. most versions retain the practice of having one actor play jekyll and hyde, with the transformation seen by the audience. [ 63 ] [ 92 ] several early film versions relied more on sullivan's play than stevenson's novella. [ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ b ] the thanhouser company produced a 1912 film version , directed by lucius henderson and starring james cruze . the one-reel film , based on sullivan's play, [ 96 ] may be an exception to the custom of one actor playing jekyll and hyde. although cruze was credited with a dual role, harry benham (who played the father of jekyll's fiancée), said in 1963 that he had played hyde in some scenes. [ 95 ] [ 97 ] [ 98 ] in 1920, famous players–lasky produced a feature-length version directed by john s. robertson . [ c ] john barrymore starred as jekyll and hyde, with martha mansfield as his fiancée. clara beranger 's script followed sullivan's play in having jekyll engaged to sir carew's daughter, but also added a relationship between hyde and an italian dancer (played by nita naldi ). [ 96 ] the addition of a female companion for hyde became a feature of many later adaptations. [ 100 ] [ 101 ] weltman says the design for hyde's residence in the movie may have been influenced by mansfield's set decoration choices, based on descriptions given in contemporary reviews of the play. [ 102 ] the first sound film based on sullivan's play was a 1931 version , produced and directed by rouben mamoulian and distributed by paramount pictures . the film's writers, samuel hoffenstein and percy heath , followed much of sullivan's storyline. [ 103 ] their screenplay adds a female companion for hyde similar to robertson's 1920 version, [ 104 ] but hyde murders her, a plot point that weltman believes was influenced by the real-world association of the play with jack the ripper. [ 105 ] hoffenstein and heath were nominated for the academy award for best adapted screenplay , and the cinematographer karl struss was nominated for the academy award for best cinematography . fredric march won the academy award for best actor for his portrayal of jekyll and hyde. [ 106 ] metro-goldwyn-mayer released a 1941 film which was a remake of mamoulian's 1931 film. victor fleming directed, and spencer tracy starred. [ 107 ] this version was nominated for three academy awards: joseph ruttenberg for best cinematography, black-and-white ; harold f. kress for best film editing , and franz waxman for best score of a dramatic picture . [ 108 ] according to the film historian denis meikle, robertson, mamoulian, and fleming's films followed a pattern set by sullivan's play: making hyde's evil sexual and the jekyll–hyde transformation central to the performance. meikle views this as a deterioration of stevenson's original narrative initiated by sullivan. [ 109 ] the literary scholar edwin m. eigner says of the play and movies based on it that "each [adaptation] did its bit to coarsen stevenson's ideas". [ 78 ] weltman says the play's association with jack the ripper also affected many adaptions, such as the 1990 broadway musical jekyll & hyde and the 1971 film dr. jekyll and sister hyde . [ 110 ] however, many later adaptations diverged from the model established by sullivan and the early films; some returned to stevenson's novella, and others spun new variations from aspects of earlier versions. [ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ]

fantastic novels was an american science fiction and fantasy pulp magazine published by the munsey company of new york from 1940 to 1941, and again by popular publications , also of new york, from 1948 to 1951. it was a companion to famous fantastic mysteries . like that magazine, it mostly reprinted science fiction and fantasy classics from earlier decades, such as works by a. merritt , george allan england , and victor rousseau , though it occasionally published reprints of more recent material, such as earth's last citadel by henry kuttner and c. l. moore . the magazine lasted for 5 issues in its first incarnation, and for another 20 in the revived version from popular publications. mary gnaedinger edited both series; her interest in reprinting merritt's work helped make him one of the better-known fantasy writers of the era. a canadian edition from 1948 to 1951 reprinted 17 issues of the second series; two others were reprinted in great britain in 1950 and 1951. in the early 20th century, science fiction stories were frequently published in popular magazines, [ 1 ] with the munsey company , a major pulp magazine publisher, printing a great deal of science fiction. [ 1 ] in 1926 amazing stories became the first specialist pulp magazine publisher of science fiction. [ 2 ] munsey continued to print science fiction in argosy during the 1930s, and in 1939 took advantage of the new genre's growing popularity by launching famous fantastic mysteries , a vehicle to reprint the most popular fantasy and science fiction stories from the munsey magazines. [ 3 ] the new title immediately became successful, and demand for reprints of old favorites was such that munsey decided to launch an additional magazine, fantastic novels , in july 1940, edited, like famous fantastic mysteries , by mary gnaedinger. [ 3 ] the two magazines were placed on bimonthly schedules, arranged to alternate with each other, [ 2 ] though the schedule slipped slightly with the fifth issue of fantastic novels , dated april 1941 but following the january 1941 issue. [ 4 ] fantastic novels was suspended after that issue and merged with famous fantastic mysteries . [ 4 ] the stated reason was that famous fantastic mysteries "is apparently the favorite title", but it seems likely that production difficulties caused by world war ii played a part. [ 4 ] the june 1941 and august 1941 issues of famous fantastic mysteries both carried the slogan "combined with fantastic novels magazine" on the cover. [ 5 ] [ 6 ] fantastic novels reappeared in 1948 through popular publications , which had acquired famous fantastic mysteries from munsey at the end of 1942. [ 7 ] gnaedinger remained editor of famous fantastic mysteries when popular took over, and was editor of the second incarnation of fantastic novels . [ 4 ] [ 7 ] the march 1948 issue, the first of the new series, was catalogued volume 1, number 6, as if there had been no break in publication. [ 4 ] this version lasted for a further 20 issues, ending without notice with the june 1951 issue. it was apparently a sudden decision; the final issue had announced plans to reprint otis adelbert kline 's maza of the moon . [ 8 ] fantastic novels came into existence because of the demand from readers of famous fantastic mysteries for book-length reprints. [ 3 ] gnaedinger observed that "everyone seems to have realized that although [the] set-up of five to seven stories with two serials running, was highly satisfactory, that the long list of novels would have to be speeded up somehow". [ 7 ] when the new magazine was launched, famous fantastic mysteries was partway through serialization of austin hall and homer eon flint 's the blind spot , with the third episode appearing in the may/june 1940 issue. rather than complete the serialization, gnaedinger printed the novel in its entirety in the first issue of fantastic novels , ensuring that readers of famous fantastic mysteries would also acquire the new magazine. [ 3 ] over the next four issues she printed ray cummings ' people of the golden atom , ralph milne farley 's the radio beasts , and two novels by a. merritt : the snake mother and the dwellers in the mirage . gnaedinger's interest in reprinting merritt's work helped make him one of the better-known fantasy writers of the era. [ 4 ] in the second series, from 1948 to 1951, gnaedinger continued to reprint work by merritt, along with other reader favorites from the munsey years. works by george allan england , victor rousseau , ray cummings, and francis stevens (the pen name of gertrude barrows bennett ) appeared, [ 4 ] [ 9 ] as well as (occasionally) reprints of more recent work, such as earth's last citadel , by henry kuttner and c. l. moore , which had been serialized in argosy in 1943. [ 4 ] [ 10 ] in the early 1950s, when first fantastic novels and two years later famous fantastic mysteries ceased publication, it is likely that the audience for science fiction was growing too sophisticated for these early works. [ 4 ] each issue, except the last one, featured a lead novel with additional short fiction. [ 11 ] the cover artwork was mostly by virgil finlay , lawrence stevens , peter stevens , and norman saunders , with one early cover contributed by frank r. paul . [ notes 1 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] mary gnaedinger edited fantastic novels for both the munsey and popular publications series. five issues appeared between july 1940 and april 1941, and an additional twenty from march 1948 to june 1951. the schedule was bimonthly, with only two irregularities: the issues that would have been dated march 1941 and march 1951 were each delayed by a month. the volume numbering was regular throughout, with four volumes of six numbers, and a final fifth volume of one number. the magazine was printed in pulp format throughout both series, and was priced at 20 cents for the first two issues; then 10 cents for the remainder of the first series and 25 cents for issues in the second series. fantastic novels was 144 pages for the first two issues, 128 pages for two issues, and 112 pages for the last issue of the first series; it was 132 pages from the start of the second series until the november 1950 issue, and then 128 pages for january 1951, and 112 pages for the last two issues. [ 4 ] a canadian reprint edition ran from september 1948 to june 1951; these were published by the toronto-based new publications. [ 4 ] they were half an inch taller than the u.s. editions and used different back-cover advertisements, but were otherwise identical to the u.s. issues of the same date. [ 15 ] two issues were released in britain: a single issue was released in march 1950; it was a copy of the november 1949 u.s. issue but was neither numbered nor dated. the other british issue was a copy of the may 1949 issue, cut to only 64 pages; it was released in june 1951 and was undated but numbered 1. both these issues were published by pemberton's and distributed by thorpe & porter . [ 4 ]

bart simpson is a fictional character in the american animated television series the simpsons who is part of the simpson family . described as one of the 100 most important people of the 20th century by time , bart was created and designed by matt groening in james l. brooks 's office. bart, alongside the rest of the family, debuted in the short " good night " on the tracey ullman show on april 19, 1987. two years later, the family received their own series, which premiered on fox on december 17, 1989. born on april fools' day according to groening, bart is ten years old; he is the eldest child and only son of homer and marge simpson , and has two sisters, lisa and maggie . voiced by nancy cartwright (pictured) , bart is known for his mischievousness, rebelliousness, and disrespect for authority, as well as his prank calls to moe , chalkboard gags in the opening sequence , and catchphrases. bart is considered an iconic fictional television character of the 1990s and has been called an american cultural icon . ( full article... ) the 2012 aston martin vanquish was the second generation of the vanquish , a grand touring car . it was produced between 2012 and 2018 by the british carmaker aston martin . it succeeded the dbs , resurrected the name of the 2001–2007 model, and was available as both a coupe and a convertible , the latter known as the volante. the vanquish, which is based upon the db9 's architecture , extensively incorporates aluminium throughout its construction. the vanquish was designed by marek reichman and showcased at several events in 2012. it was produced in gaydon , a village in warwickshire , england. aston martin unveiled the vanquish volante in august 2013 and began deliveries late that year. in 2014, they implemented minor modifications to the vanquish's engine performance. a significantly modified version, the vanquish s, was launched in 2016; its volante version was released the following year. the vanquish s introduced such updates as increased horsepower and torque, and a new body kit . ( full article... ) big butte creek is a 12-mile-long (19 km) tributary of the rogue river located in the u.s. state of oregon . it drains approximately 245 square miles (630 km 2 ) of jackson county . the north fork of the creek begins on rustler peak and the south fork's headwaters are near mount mcloughlin (pictured) . they meet near butte falls , and big butte creek flows generally northwest until it empties into the rogue river about 1 mile (1.6 km) southwest of lost creek dam (william l. jess dam). big butte creek's watershed was originally settled more than 8,000 years ago by the klamath , upper umpqua , and takelma tribes of native americans . in the rogue river wars of the 1850s, most of the native americans were either killed or forced into indian reservations . the first non- indigenous settlers arrived in the 1860s, and the area was quickly developed. the creek was named after snowy butte, an early name for mount mcloughlin. the small city of butte falls was incorporated in 1911. ( full article... ) a british army helicopter was destroyed in a friendly fire incident during the falklands war , killing its four occupants. in the early hours of 6 june 1982, the royal navy destroyer hms cardiff was looking for aircraft supplying the argentine forces on the falkland islands . a gazelle helicopter (example pictured) of the army air corps was making a delivery to british troops on east falkland . cardiff 's crew assumed that it was hostile and fired two missiles, destroying it. although cardiff was suspected, scientific tests on the wreckage were inconclusive. no formal inquiry was held until four years later. defending their claim that the helicopter had been lost in action, the ministry of defence stated that they did not want to upset relatives until they had ascertained how it had been shot down. a board of inquiry identified factors including a lack of communication between the army and the navy, and the army's decision to turn off helicopters' identification friend or foe transmitters. ( full article... ) the giant anteater is a large insectivorous mammal native to central and south america. it is one of four living species of anteater and is classified with sloths in the order pilosa . this species is mostly terrestrial, in contrast to other living anteaters, which are arboreal or semi-arboreal. it is the largest of its family, stretching 182–217 cm (5.97–7.12 ft) and weighing 33–41 kg (73–90 lb) for males and 27–39 kg (60–86 lb) for females. it is recognizable by its elongated snout, bushy tail, long foreclaws and distinctively colored pelage . the anteater's habitats include grassland and rainforest and it feeds primarily on ants and termites , using its foreclaws to dig them up and its long, sticky tongue to collect them. the giant anteater is listed as vulnerable by the international union for conservation of nature . threats to its survival include habitat destruction and hunting. the anteater has been featured in pre-columbian myths and folktales, and modern popular culture. ( full article... ) the suicide of rachel foster is a 2020 adventure video game developed by one-o-one games and published by daedalic entertainment . it focuses on nicole wilson returning to her family's hotel ten years after she and her mother left, once her father's affair with the teenaged rachel foster was discovered, who then killed herself while pregnant. trapped in the hotel due to a snowstorm, nicole seeks to uncover the mystery of rachel's suicide . borne out of the studio's desire to create a horror game relying on suspense over monsters, it was set in a hotel to elicit fear and claustrophobia in players. the developers sought professional advice to portray topics like child sexual abuse and suicide compassionately. released on windows , playstation 4 , xbox one , and nintendo switch , the game received mixed reviews. the handling of child sexual abuse and suicide was heavily criticized, particularly over an interactive suicide attempt. a sequel, the fading of nicole wilson , is set to be released in 2025. ( full article... ) what a merry-go-round is the eighteenth collection by british fashion designer alexander mcqueen , made for the autumn/winter 2001 season of his eponymous fashion house . the collection drew on imagery of clowns and carnivals, inspired by mcqueen's feelings about childhood and his experiences in the fashion industry. the designs were influenced by military chic , cinema such as nosferatu (1922) and cabaret (1972), 1920s flapper fashion and the french revolution . the palette comprised dark colours complemented with neutrals and muted greens. the collection's runway show was staged in february 2001 in a dark room with a carousel at the centre, with 62 looks (one pictured) presented. it was mcqueen's final show in london. critical response to the collection was generally positive, and it has attracted some academic analysis for the theme and messaging. it served as a critique of the fashion industry, which mcqueen sometimes described as toxic and suffocating. ( full article... ) empress matilda (1102–1167) was a claimant to the english throne during the civil war known as the anarchy . the daughter of king henry i , she moved to germany to marry the future henry v, holy roman emperor . her younger brother died in 1120, leaving a succession crisis. on henry v's death in 1125, her father arranged for her to marry geoffrey of anjou . henry i nominated her as his heir before his death in 1135, but she faced opposition from the norman barons and the throne was taken by her cousin stephen of blois . in 1139, matilda travelled to england to take the crown by force. she captured stephen at the battle of lincoln in 1141, but crowds in london blocked her attempt to be crowned and she was never formally declared queen. her half-brother was captured and matilda exchanged him for stephen. a stalemate developed and she returned to normandy in 1148, leaving her eldest son—later henry ii —to continue the campaign. she then focused on leading normandy and giving her son political advice. ( full article... ) william d. hoard (october 10, 1836 – november 22, 1918) was an american politician, newspaper publisher, and agriculture advocate who served as the 16th governor of wisconsin from 1889 to 1891. called the "father of modern dairying", hoard's advocacy for scientific agriculture and the expansion of dairy farming has been credited with changing wisconsin 's agricultural economy. in his magazine hoard's dairyman , he promoted the use of silos and alfalfa for cattle feed, testing for bovine tuberculosis , and raising particular breeds of cattle for milk or meat. his work with the wisconsin dairymen's association led to the export of wisconsin dairy products to the east coast , where they were renowned. as governor of wisconsin, hoard established the dairy and food commission—one of the first food inspection agencies in the united states—and passed a short-lived education law that required all students in the state to be taught in english as part of the americanization process for immigrants. ( full article... ) " abyssinia, henry " is the 72nd episode of the american television series m*a*s*h , and the final episode of its third season. first aired on march 18, 1975, and written by everett greenbaum and jim fritzell, the episode was most notable for its shocking and unexpected ending. the episode's plot centers on the honorable discharge and subsequent departure of the 4077th mash's commander, lieutenant colonel henry blake , played by mclean stevenson . the controversial ending, the reporting of blake's death, has since been referenced and parodied many times. it prompted more than 1,000 letters to series producers gene reynolds and larry gelbart , and drew fire from both cbs and 20th century fox . after the episode's production, both stevenson and wayne rogers , who played trapper john mcintyre , left the series to pursue other interests. these departures and their subsequent replacements signaled the beginning of a major shift in the series's focus. ( full article... ) the banded sugar ant ( camponotus consobrinus ) is a species of ant endemic to australia. a member of the genus camponotus in the subfamily formicinae , it was described by german entomologist wilhelm ferdinand erichson in 1842. its common name refers to the ant's preference for sweet food and the distinctive orange-brown band around its gaster . the ant is polymorphic and relatively large, with castes called major workers (soldiers) and minor workers. ants in these groups measure around 5 to 15 millimetres (0.20 to 0.59 inches) in length. mainly nocturnal, the ants prefer a mesic habitat , and are commonly found in forests and woodlands; they are also found in urban areas, where they are considered a household pest. the ant's diet includes sweet secretions obtained from aphids and other insects. workers prey on some insects, killing them with a spray of formic acid . banded sugar ants are prey for other ants, echidnas and birds. the eggs of this species were consumed by indigenous australians . ( full article... ) dolly de leon (born april 12, 1969) is a filipino actress. de leon began her career on stage, and made her film debut in shake, rattle & roll iii (1991). she was later cast in minor and uncredited roles in films and took on guest parts in television shows. her breakthrough came in the crime drama verdict (2019), for which she won a famas award for best supporting actress . de leon achieved international recognition and acclaim for her role in triangle of sadness (2022), winning the guldbagge award and the los angeles film critics association award for best supporting performance , in addition to nominations for a golden globe award and for a bafta award for best supporting actress ; she became the first filipino actress to be nominated for the latter two awards. de leon co-founded ladies who launch, a social services group that supports disadvantaged communities. british vogue named her one of the 31 most famous stars in the world in 2023. ( full article... ) the boat race 2020 was a side-by-side rowing race scheduled to take place on 29 march 2020. held annually, the boat race is contested between crews from the university of oxford and the university of cambridge along a 4.2-mile (6.8 km) tidal stretch of the river thames (course pictured) in south-west london. this would have been the 75th women's race and the 166th men's race. cambridge led the longstanding rivalry 84–80 and 44–30 in the men's and women's races, respectively. the races were cancelled on 16 march 2020 as a consequence of the covid-19 pandemic in the united kingdom . other than as a result of war, it was the first time that the men's race had been cancelled since the first edition in 1845 . it was also the first cancellation of the women's race since its 1964 revival. the 2020 event would have been the first time that both senior races would be umpired by women. the members of each crew were announced on the date that the race would have been contested. ( full article... ) muhammad iv (14 april 1315 – 25 august 1333) was the ruler of the emirate of granada (map pictured) on the iberian peninsula from 1325 to 1333. he was the sixth sultan of the nasrid dynasty , succeeding to the throne at the age of 10 when his father, ismail i , was assassinated. the initial years of his reign were marked by civil war between his ministers, drawing in castile , granada's neighbour to the north. the civil war ended in 1328 when muhammad took a more active role in government. castile and the kingdom of aragon invaded granada in 1330. in 1332, muhammad sailed to the marinid court at fez to request help, and the new marinid sultan abu al-hasan ali sent 5,000 troops, who besieged the castilians at gibraltar . the town surrendered in june 1333 but was in turn besieged . after confused fighting a truce was agreed on 24 august 1333 that restored the 1331 treaty. one day later, muhammad was assassinated, aged 18. he was succeeded by his brother yusuf i . ( full article... ) lady blue is an american detective and action-adventure television series that originally aired on the american broadcasting company (abc). produced by david gerber , the show's pilot aired as a television film on april 15, 1985, before being picked up for a full series from september 15, 1985, to january 25, 1986. the show revolves around chicago detective katy mahoney ( jamie rose ) and her violent methods of handling cases. the supporting cast includes danny aiello , ron dean , diane dorsey, bruce a. young , nan woods , and ricardo gutierrez . lady blue was criticized by several watchdog organizations as the most violent show on television with critics calling mahoney "dirty harriet" (after clint eastwood 's character dirty harry ). abc canceled it in early 1986, partially due to the complaints about excessive violence. critical reception to the series was primarily negative during its run and the series has not been released on dvd, blu-ray, or an online streaming service. ( full article... ) the mind is that which thinks , feels , perceives , imagines , remembers , and wills , including both conscious and unconscious processes. its exact nature is debated, like whether mental phenomena are internal activities of transforming information or dispositions to engage in observable behavior. the mind–body problem is the challenge of explaining the relation between matter and mind. according to physicalism , minds are not independent entities but certain aspects of material objects. the evolutionary history of the mind is tied to the development of brains , but it is controversial at which point minds emerged and which non-human animals possess minds. similar theoretical challenges concern the possibility of artificial minds powered by computers. the main fields studying the mind include psychology , neuroscience , cognitive science , and the philosophy of mind . their methods range from empirical observation and neuroimaging to conceptual analysis and thought experiments . ( full article... ) bæddel and bædling are old english terms referring to non-normative sexual or gender categories. occurring in a small number of medieval glossaries and penitentials (guides for religious penance ), the exact meaning of the terms (and their distinction, if any) are debated by scholars. both terms are often connected to effeminacy and adultery . bæddel is glossed as ' hermaphrodite ' and a 'man of both sexes' in its two extant glosses, while bædling is often glossed with terms associated with effeminacy and softness. the oxford english dictionary supports bæddel as the etymological root of the english adjective bad , although scholars propose alternative origins, including a shared root with both bæddel and bædling . the term bædlings may have included people assigned female at birth who took on masculine social roles or referred to intersex people . scholars suggest that bædlings could represent a third gender outside the gender binary or a form of gender nonconformity in anglo-saxon society . ( full article... ) the battle of poison spring was fought on april 18, 1864, as part of the camden expedition during the american civil war. in support of the red river campaign in louisiana, a union force commanded by frederick steele had moved from little rock, arkansas , and occupied camden . short on supplies, steele sent a detachment commanded by james m. williams to forage for corn that was reported to be in the area. confederate cavalry commanded by john s. marmaduke and samuel b. maxey attacked the foraging party. marmaduke's men formed a roadblock to the east, while maxey's men attacked from the south. the first two confederate attacks were unsuccessful, but the third broke the union line. williams's command was routed, losing its wagon train. african-american soldiers from the 1st kansas colored infantry regiment were massacred during and after the battle. the defeat at poison spring and another defeat at the battle of marks' mills led steele to retreat to little rock. ( full article... ) edgar towner (19 april 1890 – 18 august 1972) was an australian recipient of the victoria cross , awarded for his actions during an attack on mont saint-quentin during world war i. born in queensland, towner enlisted in the australian imperial force in 1915. he served in egypt with the 25th battalion until his unit was sent to the western front . he then transferred to the 2nd machine gun battalion where he was commissioned as a lieutenant. in june 1918, towner led a machine gun section attack near morlancourt while under heavy fire, for which he was awarded the military cross . in september, he was involved in the allied counteroffensive that broke the german lines at mont saint-quentin and péronne . towner returned to australia after being discharged in august 1919. he was appointed a director of the russleigh pastoral company and re-enlisted during world war ii, when he was promoted to major . he was awarded the dr thomson foundation gold medal in 1956 for his geographical work. ( full article... ) fantastic novels was an american science-fiction and fantasy pulp magazine published by the munsey company of new york from 1940 to 1941, and by popular publications from 1948 to 1951. it was launched as a bimonthly companion magazine to famous fantastic mysteries in response to heavy demand for book-length reprints of stories from pulp magazines such as amazing stories and argosy . it ran science-fiction and fantasy classics from earlier decades, including novels by a. merritt , george allan england , victor rousseau and others, and occasionally published reprints of more recent work, such as earth's last citadel by henry kuttner and c. l. moore . there were five issues in the magazine's first incarnation and another twenty in the revived version from popular publications, along with seventeen canadian and two british reprints. mary gnaedinger edited both series; her interest in reprinting merritt's work helped make him one of the better-known fantasy writers of the era. ( full article... ) dr. jekyll and mr. hyde is a play written by thomas russell sullivan in collaboration with the actor richard mansfield (pictured) . it is an adaptation of strange case of dr jekyll and mr hyde , an 1886 novella by robert louis stevenson . the story focuses on the respected london doctor henry jekyll , who uses a potion to transform into edward hyde, a loathsome criminal. intrigued by the opportunity to play a dual role, mansfield secured the stage rights and asked sullivan to write the adaptation. the play debuted in boston on may 9, 1887, and opened on broadway that september. mansfield's performance was acclaimed by critics. the play opened in london in august 1888, just before the first jack the ripper murders. the press compared the murderer to the jekyll character, and mansfield was suggested as a suspect. mansfield performed the play until shortly before his death in 1907. sullivan made changes from stevenson's story that have been adopted by subsequent adaptations, including film versions. ( full article... ) terry fox (1958–1981) was a canadian humanitarian, athlete and fundraiser. he was a distance runner and basketball player, and continued both pursuits after his right leg was amputated upon being diagnosed with osteosarcoma in 1977. his chemotherapy inspired him to attempt the marathon of hope, a cross-canada run, to raise funds for cancer research. he began on april 12, 1980, at st. john's, newfoundland , and ran west for 143 days and 5,373 kilometres (3,339 mi) – the equivalent of a marathon a day – until forced to stop near thunder bay, ontario , after cancer returned in his lungs. fox captivated the country; he was named newsmaker of the year in both 1980 and 1981 and appointed companion of the order of canada . his run led to millions of dollars in donations. he inspired the terry fox run , held in more than 60 countries and the world's largest one-day fundraiser for cancer research . considered a national hero, buildings, roads and parks across canada have been named in his honour. ( full article... ) the aineta aryballos is an ancient greek aryballos (a small, spherical flask or vase), made between approximately 625 and 570 bce in the city of corinth in southern greece. approximately 6.35 centimetres (2.50 in) in both height and diameter, it was intended to contain perfumed oil or unguent , and is likely to have been owned by a high-class courtesan ( hetaira ) by the name of aineta. the vase's illegal sale to the british museum in 1865 led to the prosecution of its seller, the athenian professor and art dealer athanasios rhousopoulos , and exposed his widespread involvement in antiquities crime. the vase is inscribed with a portrait, probably that of aineta, who is named in the inscription on the vase. the aryballos is likely to have been found in a grave, probably that of aineta. in 1877, rhousopoulos was fined for selling the vase in contravention of greek law. the case represented a relatively rare successful use of state power against the illegal trade in ancient greek artefacts. ( full article... ) " i'm god " is an instrumental song by the american producer michael volpe, known professionally as clams casino , and the british singer imogen heap (pictured) . volpe created "i'm god" in 2009 by sampling heap's 2005 song " just for now ". volpe sent the track to the rapper lil b ; the instrumental is featured on a song of the same name on lil b's 2009 mixtape, 6 kiss . volpe self-released "i'm god" in 2011 and, in 2012, it appeared on his mixtape instrumentals 2 . it was officially released on streaming on april 24, 2020, appearing on volpe's instrumental relics compilation. a cloud rap song, "i'm god" is noted for its ethereal and dream-like aspects. it received a cult following on the internet, being unofficially reuploaded by fans to social media, including in the form of a music video that incorporates clips from the 1989 french film perdues dans new york . "i'm god" went on to be influential in the genre of cloud rap. it was certified gold in the us by the recording industry association of america . ( full article... ) the 1925 fa cup final was an association football match contested by sheffield united and cardiff city on 25 april 1925 at wembley stadium in london, england. the final was the showpiece match of english football's primary cup competition, the football association challenge cup (fa cup), organised by the football association . both teams entered the competition in the first round and progressed through five stages to reach the final. both clubs conceded only two goals each en route to the final. this was the second time a team from outside england had reached an fa cup final . it was also the first time a welsh team had reached the final of the competition. nearly 92,000 spectators attended the final. the only goal of the game was scored by sheffield united's fred tunstall after 30 minutes and the match finished 1–0 . the match remains the last time sheffield united won the fa cup. cardiff later played in and won the 1927 final . ( full article... ) black slave's cry to heaven was a 1907 stage play performed by the spring willow society , a chinese student troupe, in tokyo , japan. adapted by zeng xiaogu from a translation of harriet beecher stowe 's novel uncle tom's cabin , the play focused on the experiences and eventual escape of two slaves, eliza and george, after killing several of their pursuers. modified to allegorically call attention to the experiences of chinese migrants in the united states , black slave's cry to heaven was innovative in its use of spoken dialogue and realistic set designs. performed twice at the hongō-za theatre, the show was well received by critics and audiences. although its script has been lost , the play has inspired subsequent works. due to its technical innovations and nationalist themes, black slave's cry to heaven has been canonized as the first modern, western-style chinese drama . ( full article... ) the legend of zelda: majora's mask is a 2000 action-adventure game developed and published by nintendo for the nintendo 64 . it makes use of enhanced 3d graphics and features several gameplay changes, but reuses elements and character models from ocarina of time (1998). it follows link , who arrives in a parallel world, termina, and becomes embroiled in a quest to prevent the moon from crashing in three days' time. the game introduces gameplay concepts revolving around a perpetually repeating three-day cycle and the use of various masks that transform link into different forms, and requires the expansion pak add-on for the nintendo 64, which provides additional memory for more refined graphics. majora's mask was acclaimed by critics, and generated a cult following . it was rereleased for the gamecube in 2003, and for the online services of the wii , wii u , and nintendo switch . an enhanced remake for the nintendo 3ds was released in 2015. ( full article... ) lemurs of madagascar is a 2010 reference work and field guide on the lemurs of madagascar, giving descriptions and biogeographic data for the known species. the primary contributor is russell mittermeier , president of conservation international , and the cover art and illustrations are by stephen d. nash . currently in its third edition, the book provides details about all known lemur species , general information about lemurs and their history, and tips for identifying species. four related pocket field guides have also been released, containing color illustrations of each species, miniature range maps, and species checklists. the first edition was reviewed favorably. the first edition identified 50 lemur species and subspecies, increased to 71 in the second edition and 101 in the third. the taxonomy promoted by these books has been questioned by researchers, such as ian tattersall , who view these growing numbers of lemur species as insufficiently justified inflation of species numbers . ( full article... ) the portland spy ring was an espionage group active in the united kingdom between 1953 and 1961. it comprised five people who obtained classified research documents from the admiralty underwater weapons establishment (auwe) on the isle of portland , dorset, and passed them to the soviet union . two of the group, harry houghton and ethel gee worked at the auwe and had access to classified information. they passed this to their handler , konon molody (pictured) , a kgb agent acting under a canadian passport in the name gordon lonsdale. lonsdale would pass the documents to lona and morris cohen , american communists living under the names helen and peter kroger; they passed the information to moscow. the ring was exposed in 1960 after a tip-off from the polish spy michael goleniewski . the information he supplied was enough to identify houghton. mi5 surveillance uncovered the rest of the group, who were arrested in january 1961 and tried that march. sentences for the group ranged from 15 to 25 years. ( full article... ) the initial campaign of the breton civil war took place in 1341. john, duke of brittany , had died on 30 april 1341 and the duchy of brittany was claimed by both his younger half-brother, john of montfort ; and his niece 's husband, charles of blois , a nephew of the king of france, philip vi . john quickly installed friendly garrisons in most of the towns and castles of brittany. rumours of john's discussions with english emissaries reached philip, causing him to recognise charles as the new duke. john refused to give way and philip sent an army to brittany to impose charles. within a month john had been defeated and was a prisoner. his wife, joanna , took command of her husband's army, stormed the town of redon and moved to the small but strongly walled port of hennebont . there she set up her two-year-old son, also named john , as the faction's figurehead. the hundred years' war between france and england had been ongoing since 1337, so she despatched a senior counsellor to encourage english military intervention. ( full article... )

featured articles are considered to be some of the best articles wikipedia has to offer, as determined by wikipedia's editors . they are used by editors as examples for writing other articles. before being listed here, articles are reviewed as featured article candidates for accuracy, neutrality, completeness, and style according to our featured article criteria . many featured articles were previously good articles (which are reviewed with a less restrictive set of criteria). featured articles comprise 6,730 out of a total of 6,985,246 articles on the english wikipedia (about 0.1% or one out of every 1,030 articles). articles that no longer meet the criteria can be proposed for improvement or removal at featured article review . on non-mobile versions of our website, a small bronze star icon ( ) on the top right corner of an article's page indicates that the article is featured. on most smartphones and tablets you can also select "desktop" at the very bottom of the page or "request desktop site" in your browser's menu to see this line (do a search to find out how). additionally, if the current article is featured in another language, a yellow star will appear next to the corresponding entry in the language switcher to let you know. biographies are in sub-topics according to the larger topics acra (fortress) – ai-khanoum – aineta aryballos – barkhale camp – benty grange hanging bowl – benty grange helmet – beulé gate – bonn–oberkassel dog – cefnllys castle – chestnuts long barrow – chetro ketl – coffin stone – coldrum long barrow – combe hill, east sussex – corp naomh – cross temple, fangshan – egyptian temple – emesa helmet – fir clump stone circle – freston causewayed enclosure – gevninge helmet fragment – great wilbraham (causewayed enclosure) – greece runestones – guandimiao – guilden morden boar – horncastle boar's head – hoxne hoard – knap hill – kronan (ship) – lindow man – maiden castle, dorset – mary rose – maya stelae – norton priory – offham hill – nine stones, winterbourne abbas – palmyra – pioneer helmet – porlock stone circle – pyramid of neferirkare – pyramid of nyuserre – pyramid of sahure – pyramid of unas – quiriguá – roman temple of bziza – rosetta stone – royal necropolis of byblos – shorwell helmet – smythe's megalith – takalik abaj – temple of apollo palatinus – temple of eshmun – tomb of kha and merit – the trundle – vasa (ship) – whitehawk camp – withypool stone circle (57 articles) 1 wall street – 23 wall street – 40 wall street – 55 wall street – 270 park avenue (1960–2021) – 330 west 42nd street – 550 madison avenue – 1271 avenue of the americas – alexander hamilton u.s. custom house – american bank note company printing plant – angkor wat – art deco architecture of new york city – belton house – biblioteca marciana – blakeney chapel – bodiam castle – boot monument – bramall hall – bramshill house – brougham castle – bruce castle – buckingham palace – buckton castle – buildings and architecture of bristol – buildings of jesus college, oxford – buildings of nuffield college, oxford – capon chapel – castell coch – castle – cathedral of the immaculate conception (moscow) – catherine de' medici's building projects – cbs building – ceilings of the natural history museum, london – chartwell – citigroup center – clemuel ricketts mansion – construction of rockefeller center – cragside – cullen house – denbies – duffield memorial – elgin cathedral – exelon pavilions – felix m. warburg house – freedom monument – georgetown car barn – ham house – harry f. sinclair house – hearst tower (manhattan) – hebron church (intermont, west virginia) – heian palace – holkham hall – honan chapel – house with chimaeras – hoysala architecture – icelandic phallological museum – jay pritzker pavilion – joseph priestley house – kona lanes – lever house – literary hall – little moreton hall – low memorial library – ludwigsburg palace – mccormick tribune plaza & ice rink – melbourne castle – merchant's house museum – millennium park – monadnock building – more hall annex – nelson's pillar – new york stock exchange building – old church of st nidan, llanidan – old pine church – oregon state capitol – palazzo pitti – palladian architecture – pennsylvania state capitol – peveril castle – pitfour estate – rochester castle – round church, preslav – saint fin barre's cathedral – sandringham house – santa maría de óvila – seagram building – shrine of remembrance – sicilian baroque – singer building – sissinghurst castle garden – sloan–parker house – st botolph's church, quarrington – st denys' church, sleaford – st donat's castle – st helen's church, ashby-de-la-zouch – st james' church, sydney – st melangell's church – st nicholas, blakeney – stanford memorial church – surrogate's courthouse – the tower house – tower of london – trump international hotel and tower (chicago) – tweed courthouse – valley view (romney, west virginia) – villard houses – warkworth castle – warwick castle – wells cathedral – west wycombe park – western chalukya architecture – williamsburgh savings bank tower – windsor castle (113 articles) anthony roll – book of kells – boydell shakespeare gallery – cadaver tomb of rené of chalon – the cloisters – clonmacnoise crozier – cloud gate – crown fountain – the disasters of war – dürer's rhinoceros – early netherlandish painting – empire of the sultans – equestrian statue of edward horner – fountain of time – the four stages of cruelty – funerary art – gothic boxwood miniature – hajj: journey to the heart of islam – holy thorn reliquary – hours of mary of burgundy – the minute man – mosaics of delos – museum of bad art – olmec colossal heads – oviri – portraits of odaenathus – royal gold cup – soiscél molaisse – st cuthbert gospel – statue of liberty – sutton hoo helmet (sculpture) – three beauties of the present day – tomb of antipope john xxiii – tomb of philippe pot – ukiyo-e – waddesdon bequest – weather machine (37 articles) after the deluge (painting) – annunciation (memling) – beaune altarpiece – beauty revealed – the battle of alexander at issus – the blind leading the blind – britomart redeems faire amoret – candaules, king of lydia, shews his wife by stealth to gyges, one of his ministers, as she goes to bed – the colossus of rhodes (dalí) – the combat: woman pleading for the vanquished – crucifix (cimabue, santa croce) – crucifixion and last judgement diptych – the dawn of love (painting) – the destroying angel and daemons of evil interrupting the orgies of the vicious and intemperate – dresden triptych – drowning girl – the entombment (bouts) – an experiment on a bird in the air pump – the founding ceremony of the nation – four freedoms (rockwell) – four times of the day – fragment of a crucifixion – freedom from want – freedom of worship (painting) – funerary monument to sir john hawkwood – the garden of earthly delights – the goldfinch (painting) – head vi – hope (watts) – las meninas – léal souvenir – look mickey – madonna in the church – the magdalen reading – marriage license – migration of the serbs (painting) – musidora: the bather 'at the doubtful breeze alarmed' – nativity (christus) – pope paul iii and his grandsons – portrait diptych of dürer's parents – portrait of a lady (van der weyden) – portrait of maria portinari – portrait of mariana of austria – portrait of monsieur bertin – portrait of a musician – portrait of a young girl (christus) – preparing for a fancy dress ball – the princesse de broglie – the raft of the medusa – rokeby venus – saint francis receiving the stigmata (van eyck) – saint luke drawing the virgin – september morn – the sirens and ulysses – streatham portrait – the swimming hole – the thankful poor – the third of may 1808 – three studies for figures at the base of a crucifixion – tornado over kansas – triptych, may–june 1973 – the triumph of cleopatra – virgin and child enthroned (van der weyden) – virgin and child with canon van der paele – warlugulong – whaam! – witches' sabbath (the great he-goat) – the world before the flood – the wrestlers (etty) – youth on the prow, and pleasure at the helm (70 articles) bronwyn bancroft – edward mitchell bannister – felice beato – jean bellette – matthew brettingham – william bruce (architect) – william burges – v. gordon childe – o. g. s. crawford – edward thomas daniell – homer davenport – john doubleday (restorer) – william etty – alison frantz – delancey w. gill – lisa del giocondo – john douglas (english architect) – el greco – stefan lochner – adolfo farsari – florence fuller – caspar david friedrich – peter van geersdaele – vincent van gogh – ima hogg – charles holden – hu zhengyan – panagiotis kavvadias – osbert lancaster – james b. longacre – herbert maryon – danie mellor – benjamin f. mcadoo – benjamin mountfort – margaret murray – george e. mylonas – daisy jugadai napaltjarri – wintjiya napaltjarri – makinti napanangka – hilda rix nicholas – bronwyn oliver – robert peake the elder – i. m. pei – kyriakos pittakis – minnie pwerle – ludwig ross – jacob van ruisdael – martin rundkvist – edmund sharpe – constance stokes – john thirtle – tom thomson – george vincent (painter) – alan wace – mortimer wheeler – nigel williams (conservator) – rudolf wolters – john michael wright (58 articles) archaea – bacteria – bone wars – cooperative pulling paradigm – cretaceous–paleogene extinction event – dna – dna nanotechnology – ediacaran biota – evolution – fauna of scotland – fertilisation of orchids – flight feather – flora of madagascar – genetics – history of biology – history of evolutionary thought – immune system – introduction to viruses – lemurs of madagascar (book) – major urinary proteins – metabolism – on the origin of species – phagocyte – preening – rna interference – rotating locomotion in living systems – serpin – toothcomb – virus – wells and wellington affair (30 articles) agaricus deserticola – albatrellus subrubescens – amanita bisporigera – amanita muscaria – amanita ocreata – amanita phalloides – armillaria gallica – armillaria luteobubalina – astraeus hygrometricus – auriscalpium vulgare – boletus aereus – boletus edulis – caloboletus calopus – calostoma cinnabarinum – calvatia sculpta – chalciporus piperatus – chorioactis – clathrus ruber – coprinellus micaceus – cortinarius caperatus – cortinarius violaceus – cyathus – dendrocollybia – entoloma sinuatum – exsudoporus frostii – fungus – galerina marginata – geastrum quadrifidum – geastrum triplex – gomphus clavatus – gymnopilus maritimus – gyromitra esculenta – hydnellum peckii – hydnum repandum – hygrophoropsis aurantiaca – imleria badia – imperator torosus – inocybe saliceticola – lactarius indigo – lactarius torminosus – lactifluus volemus – lycoperdon echinatum – lycoperdon perlatum – marasmius rotula – morchella rufobrunnea – mycena aurantiomarginata – mycena haematopus – myriostoma – omphalotus nidiformis – panellus stipticus – paxillus involutus – phallus indusiatus – phellinus ellipsoideus – polyozellus – psilocybe aztecorum – psilocybe semilanceata – ramaria botrytis – rhodotus – russulaceae – russula emetica – russula virescens – sarcoscypha coccinea – suillellus luridus – suillus bovinus – suillus brevipes – suillus luteus – suillus pungens – suillus salmonicolor – suillus spraguei – teloschistaceae – tricholoma pardinum – turbinellus floccosus – tylopilus felleus – verpa bohemica – xeromphalina setulipes (75 articles) acacia pycnantha – adenanthos cuneatus – adenanthos obovatus – adiantum viridimontanum – ailanthus altissima – aiphanes – alloxylon flammeum – alloxylon pinnatum – banksia aculeata – banksia attenuata – banksia aemula – banksia aquilonia – banksia blechnifolia – banksia brownii – banksia caleyi – banksia canei – banksia coccinea – banksia cuneata – banksia dentata – banksia epica – banksia ericifolia – banksia grossa – banksia ilicifolia – banksia integrifolia – banksia lemanniana – banksia marginata – banksia menziesii – banksia oblongifolia – banksia paludosa – banksia petiolaris – banksia prionotes – banksia scabrella – banksia sceptrum – banksia serrata – banksia sessilis – banksia speciosa – banksia sphaerocarpa – banksia spinulosa – banksia telmatiaea – banksia verticillata – banksia violacea – brachychiton rupestris – cucurbita – dracophyllum fiordense – drosera regia – epacris impressa – ficus aurea – ficus macrophylla – ficus obliqua – ficus rubiginosa – grevillea juniperina – hypericum sechmenii – isopogon anemonifolius – isopogon anethifolius – lambertia formosa – metrosideros bartlettii – persoonia lanceolata – persoonia levis – persoonia linearis – persoonia terminalis – pinguicula moranensis – salvia yangii – symphyotrichum lateriflorum – telopea oreades – telopea speciosissima – telopea truncata – verbascum thapsus – xerochrysum bracteatum (68 articles) akodon spegazzinii – alcathoe bat – alpine ibex – ambondro mahabo – ambulocetus – american cream draft – andalusian horse – appaloosa – archaeoindris – babakotia – baleen whale – banker horse – bat – beagle – beaver – beringian wolf – bharattherium – bluebuck – blue whale – bobcat – boulonnais horse – camas pocket gopher – canada lynx – catopsbaatar – cleveland bay – columbian mammoth – conservation of slow lorises – cougar – cryptoprocta spelea – dermotherium – dire wolf – drymoreomys – durrell's vontsira – dusky dolphin – elephant – elk – eremoryzomys – escalera's bat – european hare – euryoryzomys emmonsae – evolution of lemurs – false potto – ferugliotheriidae – ferugliotherium – flocke – fork-marked lemur – fossa (animal) – giant anteater – giant eland – giant mouse lemur – giant otter – giraffe – golden-crowned sifaka – golden jackal – gray mouse lemur – haflinger – hammond's rice rat – hartebeest – hippopotamus – homo antecessor – horseshoe bat – humpback whale – icelandic horse – impala – jaguar – javan rhinoceros – javan slow loris – knut (polar bear) – koala – lavanify – lemur – lion – livyatan – lundomys – malagasy mountain mouse – mandrill – marsh rice rat – marwari horse – megabat – mesopropithecus – miniopterus aelleni – miniopterus griveaudi – new forest pony – norman cob – noronhomys – northern voalavo – north ronaldsay sheep – olympic marmot – orangutan – orca – oryzomys – oryzomys antillarum – oryzomys couesi – oryzomys dimidiatus – oryzomys gorgasi – oryzomys peninsulae – paraceratherium – pennatomys – percheron – petter's big-footed mouse – pinniped – pipistrellus raceyi – platypus – plesiorycteropus – poitevin horse – polar bear – primate – pseudoryzomys – pygmy hippopotamus – quagga – raccoon – red panda – right whale – ring-tailed lemur – rodent – ruffed lemur – sea mink – sea otter – seorsumuscardinus – sheep – short-beaked echidna – silky sifaka – slow loris – small-toothed sportive lemur – smilodon – solo man – south asian river dolphin – springbok – steller's sea cow – strepsirrhini – subfossil lemur – suffolk punch – sumatran rhinoceros – tammar wallaby – tasmanian devil – taxonomy of lemurs – thomasomys ucucha – thoroughbred – thylacine – tiger – trait du nord – transandinomys – transandinomys bolivaris – transandinomys talamancae – triaenops menamena – viatkogorgon – voalavo – wolf – woolly mammoth – zebra (150 articles) african crake – african river martin – alpine chough – american goldfinch – american white ibis – andean condor – antbird – arctic tern – atlantic puffin – australasian gannet – australian boobook – australian magpie – australian raven – aylesbury duck – bald eagle – banded stilt – barn swallow – bee-eater – bird – banded broadbill – black-and-red broadbill – black-and-yellow broadbill – black-breasted buttonquail – black currawong – black honeyeater – black-necked grebe – black-shouldered kite – black stork – black-throated loon – black vulture – blue-faced honeyeater – bohemian waxwing – brazza's martin – broad-billed parrot – cactus wren – california condor – canada jay – cape sparrow – carnaby's black cockatoo – cattle egret – cherry-throated tanager – choiseul pigeon – cockatoo – common blackbird – common chiffchaff – common firecrest – common raven – common starling – common tern – corn crake – crescent honeyeater – cuban macaw – delichon – dodo – echo parakeet – elfin woods warbler – emperor penguin – emu – eurasian blackcap – eurasian crag martin – eurasian nuthatch – eurasian tree sparrow – eurasian treecreeper – european nightjar – european rock pipit – european storm petrel – fiji parrotfinch – flame robin – forest raven – frigatebird – fulvous whistling duck – garden warbler – goldcrest – golden swallow – golden white-eye – great auk – great cuckoo-dove – greater crested tern – great spotted woodpecker – green rosella – grey currawong – grey-cowled wood rail – guadeloupe amazon – hooded pitohui – hoopoe starling – horned sungem – huia – inaccessible island rail – indian roller – invisible rail – kelenken – kererū – killdeer – king island emu – king vulture – large rock martin – laysan honeycreeper – lesser antillean macaw – letter-winged kite – long-tailed ground roller – macaroni penguin – madeira firecrest – mangrove swallow – markham's storm petrel – mascarene grey parakeet – mascarene martin – mascarene parrot – masked booby – masked shrike – mauritius blue pigeon – mauritius sheldgoose – mistle thrush – mountain pigeon – mourning dove – nauru reed warbler – newton's parakeet – noisy miner – northern bald ibis – northern gannet – northern pintail – northern rosella – nuthatch – pacific swift – pale crag martin – pallas's leaf warbler – papuan mountain pigeon – passenger pigeon – peregrine falcon – perijá tapaculo – pelican – pied butcherbird – pied currawong – pigeon guillemot – pitta – procellariidae – przevalski's nuthatch – puerto rican amazon – rainbow pitta – red-backed fairywren – red-billed chough – red-billed quelea – red-billed tropicbird – red-capped parrot – red-capped robin – red-headed myzomela – red-necked grebe – red-tailed black cockatoo – red-tailed tropicbird – red-throated loon – red-throated wryneck – red-winged fairywren – red rail – red warbler – red wattlebird – réunion ibis – réunion swamphen – ring ouzel – rock parrot – rodrigues night heron – rodrigues parrot – rodrigues rail – rodrigues solitaire – rodrigues starling – ruff (bird) – rufous-crowned sparrow – russet sparrow – saxaul sparrow – scarlet myzomela – secretarybird – seychelles parakeet – siberian accentor – sind sparrow – snoring rail – snowy plover – song thrush – splendid fairywren – spotted green pigeon – st. croix macaw – superb fairywren – tahiti rail – tawny owl – tern – titanis – tree swallow – trocaz pigeon – tufted jay – turkey vulture – turquoise parrot – variegated fairywren – vermilion flycatcher – water rail – water pipit – western barn owl – western house martin – western jackdaw – western yellow robin – white stork – white swamphen – white-bellied sea eagle – white-breasted nuthatch – white-eyed river martin – white-headed fruit dove – white-naped xenopsaris – white-necked rockfowl – white-rumped swallow – white-winged fairywren – willie wagtail – wood stork – yellow-faced honeyeater – yellowhammer – yellow-tailed black cockatoo – zapata rail – zino's petrel (213 articles) achelousaurus – acrocanthosaurus – albertosaurus – allosaurus – amargasaurus – ankylosaurus – apatosaurus – archaeopteryx – argentinosaurus – atrociraptor – bajadasaurus – baryonyx – brachiosaurus – carnotaurus – ceratosaurus – cetiosauriscus – compsognathus – daspletosaurus – deinocheirus – deinonychus – dilophosaurus – diodorus scytobrachion – diplodocus – dinosaur – dromaeosauroides – duriavenator – edmontosaurus – edmontosaurus mummy amnh 5060 – gallimimus – giganotosaurus – gorgosaurus – herrerasaurus – heterodontosaurus – ichthyovenator – iguanodon – irritator – kosmoceratops – lambeosaurus – limusaurus – lythronax – majungasaurus – massospondylus – nasutoceratops – nemegtomaia – nigersaurus – ohmdenosaurus – opisthocoelicaudia – oxalaia – paranthodon – parasaurolophus – plateosaurus – podokesaurus – psittacosaurus – segnosaurus – siamosaurus – spinophorosaurus – stegosaurus – stegoceras – styracosaurus – tarbosaurus – thescelosaurus – triceratops – tyrannosaurus – velociraptor – xixiasaurus (65 articles) acamptonectes – alpine newt – amphibian – australian green tree frog – black mamba – blue iguana – bog turtle – cane toad – cimoliopterus – common toad – crocodilia – deinosuchus – eastern brown snake – eastern green mamba – elasmosaurus – frilled lizard – frog – galápagos tortoise – istiodactylus – jameson's mamba – japanese fire-bellied newt – king brown snake – loggerhead sea turtle – mimodactylus – mini scule – mosasaurus – noronha skink – nyctibatrachus major – painted turtle – peloneustes – phosphatodraco – red-bellied black snake – smooth newt – thalassodromeus – triturus – turtle (36 articles) american paddlefish – cretoxyrhina – cutthroat trout – electric eel – goblin shark – manta ray – megalodon – oceanic whitetip shark – pacific blue-eye – pallid sturgeon – pigeye shark – porbeagle – queen angelfish – rainbow trout – silky shark – smooth toadfish – teleost (17 articles) aleeta – ant – apororhynchus – australiformis – banded sugar ant – bivalvia – chrysiridia rhipheus – coccinellidae – gigantorhynchus – grasshopper – heptamegacanthus – isopoda – jaekelopterus – laevistrombus canarium – leech – mantis – mayfly – megalograptus – megarachne – millipede – nothomyrmecia – octopus – onychopterella – ovalipes catharus – pseudastacus – redback spider – scorpion – starfish – tabanidae – thopha saccata (30 articles) mary anning – anna blackburne – margaret sibella brown – edward drinker cope – charles darwin – gerald durrell – henry edwards (entomologist) – georg forster – johann reinhold forster – etta lemon – marcus ward lyon jr. – barbara mcclintock – frances gertrude mcgill – meinhard michael moser – william t. stearn – emma louisa turner – edvard august vainio – alfred russel wallace – francis willughby (19 articles) actuary – carucage – economy of the han dynasty – norwich market – seacology – september 2019 events in the u.s. repo market – slate industry in wales – wage reform in the soviet union, 1956–1962 (8 articles) william barley – richard cantillon – adam eckfeldt – jozo tomasevich – farran zerbe (5 articles) bae systems – legend entertainment – london necropolis company – oliver typewriter company (4 articles) 1804 dollar – 1860s replacement of the british copper coinage – alabama centennial half dollar – albany charter half dollar – american arts commemorative series medallions – apollo 11 50th anniversary commemorative coins – barber coinage – oliver bosbyshell – bridgeport, connecticut, centennial half dollar – history of the british farthing – history of the british penny (1714–1901) – history of the british penny (1901–1970) – buffalo nickel – california diamond jubilee half dollar – california pacific international exposition half dollar – cincinnati musical center half dollar – cleveland centennial half dollar – columbian half dollar – columbia, south carolina, sesquicentennial half dollar – connecticut tercentenary half dollar – delaware tercentenary half dollar – draped bust dollar – double florin – double sovereign – eisenhower dollar – elgin, illinois, centennial half dollar – five pounds (gold coin) – florin (british coin) – flowing hair dollar – flying eagle cent – fourpence (british coin) – fort vancouver centennial half dollar – franklin half dollar – charles william fremantle – gadsden purchase half dollar – gobrecht dollar – gold dollar – grant memorial coinage – half sovereign – hawaii sesquicentennial half dollar – hudson sesquicentennial half dollar – huguenot-walloon half dollar – illinois centennial half dollar – indian head cent – indian head eagle – indian head gold pieces – isabella quarter – jefferson nickel – jubilee coinage – kalākaua coinage – kennedy half dollar – lafayette dollar – lewis and clark exposition gold dollar – lexington–concord sesquicentennial half dollar – liberty head double eagle – liberty head nickel – lincoln cent – long island tercentenary half dollar – louisiana purchase exposition gold dollar – louisiana purchase sesquicentennial half dollar – lynchburg sesquicentennial half dollar – maine centennial half dollar – maryland tercentenary half dollar – mckinley birthplace memorial gold dollar – b. max mehl – mercury dime – missouri centennial half dollar – monroe doctrine centennial half dollar – morgan dollar – new rochelle 250th anniversary half dollar – nickel (united states coin) – norfolk, virginia, bicentennial half dollar – norse-american medal – old head coinage – old spanish trail half dollar – oregon trail memorial half dollar – panama–pacific commemorative coins – peace dollar – pilgrim tercentenary half dollar – benedetto pistrucci – quarter sovereign – rhode island tercentenary half dollar – roanoke island, north carolina, half dollar – roosevelt dime – saint-gaudens double eagle – sacagawea dollar – san francisco–oakland bay bridge half dollar – seated liberty dollar – shield nickel – sovereign (british coin) – standing liberty quarter – stone mountain memorial half dollar – susan b. anthony dollar – texas centennial half dollar – three-cent nickel – three-cent silver – three-dollar piece – trade dollar (united states coin) – turban head eagle – twenty-cent piece (united states coin) – two-cent piece (united states) – united states assay commission – united states bicentennial coinage – united states sesquicentennial coinage – vermont sesquicentennial half dollar – walking liberty half dollar – washington quarter – waterloo medal (pistrucci) – wisconsin territorial centennial half dollar – york county, maine, tercentenary half dollar (110 articles) diamond – enzyme – enzyme inhibitor – enzyme kinetics – history of aluminium – metalloid – noble gas – oxidative phosphorylation – periodic table – synthetic diamond – yogo sapphire (11 articles) astatine – caesium – californium – dubnium – fluorine – francium – germanium – hassium – hydrogen – lead – nihonium – niobium – oganesson – oxygen – plutonium – technetium – tennessine – thorium – xenon – yttrium – zinc (21 articles) acetic acid – β-hydroxy β-methylbutyric acid – nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide – rhodocene (4 articles) binary search – gurl.com – imac g3 – imac g4 – macintosh classic – manchester baby – manchester mark 1 – the million dollar homepage – parallel computing – power mac g4 cube (10 articles) aggie bonfire – apollo 15 postal covers incident – badge man – berlin-to-kitchener name change – british national (overseas) – burke and hare murders – the bus uncle – the chaser apec pranks – cleveland street scandal – cock lane ghost – cottingley fairies – death of mark saunders – death of ms dhu – disco demolition night – dorset ooser – female genital mutilation – flight pattern – free association of german trade unions – freedom for the thought that we hate – fuck: word taboo and protecting our first amendment liberties – green children of woolpit – gropecunt lane – growing up absurd – guy fawkes night – hands across hawthorne – hanged, drawn and quartered – harris's list of covent garden ladies – hoodening – indigenous people of the everglades region – jack the ripper – jack the ripper: the final solution – kylfings – liberty bell – littlemore priory scandals – the livestock conservancy – lynching of jesse washington – mantra-rock dance – murder of dwayne jones – murder of yvonne fletcher – the negro motorist green book – nominative determinism – pig-faced women – polish culture during world war ii – postage stamps of ireland – private case – ramblin' wreck – rosewood massacre – roswell incident – royal baccarat scandal – secretum (british museum) – sexuality after spinal cord injury – society of the song dynasty – stonewall riots – tesla and trade unions – " the thriving cult of greed and power " – torture – types riot – veiqia – " well he would, wouldn't he? " – whitechapel murders – wife selling (english custom) – the world without us – zong massacre (63 articles) armadillo shoe – bäckadräkten – the birds (collection) – black christian siriano gown of billy porter – the dance of the twisted bull – eye (collection) – the girl who lived in the tree – the hunger (collection) – illusion of kate moss – inuit clothing – irere (collection) – jack the ripper stalks his victims – joan (collection) – neptune (collection) – nihilism (collection) – the overlook (collection) – oyster dress – pantheon ad lucem – scanners (collection) – taxi driver (collection) – voss (collection) – what a merry-go-round – the widows of culloden (23 articles) leelah alcorn – hadji ali – anna anderson – marshall applewhite – biddenden maids – william d. boyce – guy bradley – louise bryant – william henry bury – josephine butler – marjorie cameron – emily davison – charles domery – marjory stoneman douglas – montague druitt – w. e. b. du bois – monroe edwards – anna filosofova – terry fox – ursula franklin – margaret fuller – gao qifeng – e. urner goodman – debora green – stanley green – william hillcourt – marie sophie hingst – fanny imlay – the boy jones – mary jane richardson jones – jamie kalven – ted kaczynski – mary van kleeck – theodora kroeber – daniel lambert – bob marshall (wilderness activist) – olive morris – florence nagle – emmeline pankhurst – elizabeth willing powel – pasqua rosée – margaret sanger – mark satin – john martin scripps – kate sheppard – grace sherwood – nadezhda stasova – robert sterling yard – mary toft – maria trubnikova – d. h. turner – cherry valentine (52 articles) 1860 boden professor of sanskrit election – amador valley high school – canadian indian residential school system – the guardian of education – history of education in wales (1701–1870) – history of infant schools in great britain – history of texas a&m university – the judd school – pomona college – prison education – romney literary society – some thoughts concerning education – stuyvesant high school (13 articles) herman vandenburg ames – ormond beatty – james e. boyd (scientist) – c. r. m. f. cruttwell – annie dove denmark – john early (educator) – eduard fraenkel – lewis w. green – patrick francis healy – robert kaske – thomas f. mulledy – j. havens richards – thomas a. spragens – john d. whitney – john c. young (pastor) (15 articles) 2008 world science festival – 2013 rosario gas explosion – apollo 4 – apollo 5 – apollo 6 – apollo 7 – apollo 8 – apollo 9 – apollo 10 – apollo 11 – apollo 12 – apollo 13 – apollo 14 – apollo 15 – apollo 16 – apollo 17 – caesar cipher – calutron – construction of the world trade center – distributed-element circuit – distributed-element filter – draining and development of the everglades – galileo project – gas metal arc welding – gas tungsten arc welding – halkett boat – hanford site – history of timekeeping devices – hoover dam – manned orbiting laboratory – mechanical filter – nerva – pigeon photography – planar transmission line – project rover – rampart dam – renewable energy in scotland – rolls-royce merlin – rolls-royce r – scout moor wind farm – shale oil extraction – sholes and glidden typewriter – shuttle-centaur – shuttle– mir program – science and technology of the song dynasty – space shuttle – sustainable energy – waveguide filter – welding (49 articles) arthur o. austin – matthew boulton – cai lun – charles inglis (engineer) – christopher c. kraft jr. – glynn lunney – jack parsons – norman selfe – joseph francis shea – otto julius zobel (10 articles) blackrocks brewery – borscht – cabbage – capri-sun – costello's – everything tastes better with bacon – gumbo – lettuce – malagasy cuisine – maple syrup – maraba coffee – medieval cuisine – pisco sour – saint vincent beer – thomcord (15 articles) eliza acton – isabella beeton – martha bradley – ann cook (cookery book writer) – elizabeth david – elinor fettiplace – hannah glasse – jane grigson – william d. hoard – florence petty – elizabeth raffald – maria rundell – alexis soyer – george washington (inventor) (14 articles) antarctica – geography and ecology of the everglades – geography of ireland – time in finland (4 articles) abberton reservoir – aliso creek (orange county) – balch creek – big butte creek – bull run river (oregon) – chetco river – colorado river – columbia river – columbia slough – doom bar – fanno creek – ganoga lake – johnson creek (willamette river tributary) – jordan river (utah) – lake burley griffin – little butte creek – plunketts creek (loyalsock creek tributary) – river parrett – riverina – rogue river (oregon) – sea – st. johns river – tryon creek – waterfalls in ricketts glen state park – white deer hole creek – willamette river (26 articles) altrincham – ann arbor, michigan – arlington, washington – ashton-under-lyne – bath, somerset – boston – briarcliff manor, new york – bristol – brownhills – canberra – carabane – caversham, new zealand – chew stoke – cleveland – covent garden – darjeeling – elcor, minnesota – george town, penang – hamilton, ontario – hillsboro, oregon – history of chincoteague, virginia – hyderabad – jerome, arizona – kent, ohio – keswick, cumbria – kigali – knowle west – little thetford – lock haven, pennsylvania – manchester – manganese, minnesota – minneapolis – navenby – neilston – noel park – pithole, pennsylvania – qatna – radcliffe, greater manchester – rhyolite, nevada – sale, greater manchester – skegness – stephens city, virginia – sultanate of singora – thistle, utah – tiruchirappalli – trafford – tumbler ridge – volubilis – waterfall gully, south australia – weymouth, dorset – winnipeg – wormshill – yarralumla, australian capital territory (53 articles) australia – bulgaria – cameroon – canada – dorset – falkland islands – germany – india – japan – madagascar – manitoba – nauru – northern england – ratanakiri province – tripura – virginia – warren county, indiana (17 articles) caroline island – ford island – isle of skye – north island (houtman abrolhos) – nosy komba – powder house island – shapinsay – surtsey (8 articles) allison guyot – barren island, brooklyn – cerro blanco (volcano) – cerro panizos – coropuna – guallatiri – hoodoo mountain – horizon guyot – hudson volcano – incapillo – joppenbergh mountain – licancabur – limalok – mauna kea – mauna loa – melville island (nova scotia) – mount berlin – mount mazama – mount melbourne – mount price (british columbia) – mount takahe – nevado del ruiz – ojos del salado – payún matrú – resolution guyot – roxy ann peak – socompa – taapaca – tennena cone – three sisters (oregon) – trout creek mountains – tseax cone – tutupaca – ubinas – upper and lower table rock – wōdejebato (36 articles) ambohimanga – banff national park – biscayne national park – black moshannon state park – blakeney point – boise national forest – bryce canyon national park – carrington moss – the catlins – chat moss – cherry springs state park – cley marshes – colton point state park – death valley national park – everglades national park – exmoor – forest park (portland, oregon) – glacier national park (u.s.) – grand teton national park – ham wall – holkham national nature reserve – hudson valley rail trail – leonard harrison state park – marojejy national park – metacomet ridge – mendip hills – north cascades national park – north norfolk coast site of special scientific interest – oregon caves national monument and preserve – petrified forest national park – presque isle state park – quehanna wild area – redwood national and state parks – ricketts glen state park – rspb dearne valley old moor – rspb minsmere – saguaro national park – sawtooth national forest – somerset levels – titchwell marsh – upper pine bottom state park – walden–wallkill rail trail – worlds end state park – zion national park (44 articles) fremantle prison – idlewild and soak zone – malkin tower – morningside park (manhattan) – muckaty station – nico ditch – oakwood cemetery (troy, new york) – postman's park – prairie avenue – riegelmann boardwalk – sci-fi dine-in theater restaurant – trafford park – warner bros. movie world (13 articles) 1257 samalas eruption – 1867 manhattan, kansas earthquake – 1949 ambato earthquake – 1968 illinois earthquake – 1980 eruption of mount st. helens – 1995 aigio earthquake – 1997 qayen earthquake – 2002 bou'in-zahra earthquake – 2005 qeshm earthquake – 2007–2008 nazko earthquakes – armero tragedy – boring lava field – calabozos – cerro azul (chile volcano) – cerro tuzgle – chicxulub crater – el tatio – geology of the grand canyon area – geology of the lassen volcanic area – geology of the zion and kolob canyons area – hualca hualca – huaynaputina – ice core – ice drilling – kamaʻehuakanaloa seamount – laguna del maule (volcano) – lake estancia – level mountain – mono–inyo craters – mount cayley volcanic field – mount edziza – mount edziza volcanic complex – newberry volcano – paleocene – pali-aike volcanic field – quelccaya ice cap – radiocarbon dating – uturuncu – volcanism of the mount edziza volcanic complex – the volcano (british columbia) (40 articles) harry glicken – david a. johnston – barry voight (3 articles) anti-tobacco movement in nazi germany – amphetamine – birth control movement in the united states – bupropion – cerebellum – complete blood count – helicobacter pylori – hippocampus – icos – ketogenic diet – linezolid – menstrual cycle – race against time (lewis book) – resurrectionists in the united kingdom – rotavirus – social history of viruses – water fluoridation (17 articles) buruli ulcer – chagas disease – cholangiocarcinoma – coeliac disease – dementia with lewy bodies – dengue fever – diffuse panbronchiolitis – dracunculiasis – endometrial cancer – hepatorenal syndrome – influenza – lung cancer – major depressive disorder – meningitis – myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome – osteochondritis dissecans – oxygen toxicity – pancreatic cancer – prostate cancer – pulmonary contusion – rhabdomyolysis – schizophrenia – subarachnoid hemorrhage – thyrotoxic periodic paralysis – tourette syndrome (25 articles) golding bird – ray farquharson – howard florey – jessie murray – ryan white (5 articles) canadian heraldry – flag of belarus – flag of canada – flag of hong kong – flag of japan – flag of singapore – order of canada – order of the garter – order of the thistle – victoria cross – victoria cross (canada) – victoria cross for australia – victoria cross for new zealand (13 articles) 1689 boston revolt – 1740 batavia massacre – 1789 virginia's 5th congressional district election – 1838 jesuit slave sale – 1858 bradford sweets poisoning – 1880 united states presidential election – 1907 tiflis bank robbery – 1937 brazilian coup d'état – 1954 guatemalan coup d'état – 1960 south vietnamese coup attempt – 1962 south vietnamese independence palace bombing – 1964 brinks hotel bombing – 1966 new york city smog – 1969 curaçao uprising – 1974 white house helicopter incident – 1981 irish hunger strike – 2001 tiananmen square self-immolation incident – 2016 irkutsk mass methanol poisoning – aberfan disaster – abuwtiyuw – act of independence of lithuania – alodia – amundsen's south pole expedition – ancaster incident – armenian genocide – armenian genocide denial – arrest and assassination of ngô đình diệm – assassination of john f. kennedy – assassination of spencer perceval – assassination of talaat pasha – assassination of william mckinley – avenue range station massacre – australasian antarctic expedition – baker street robbery – bal des ardents – baltimore railroad strike of 1877 – bath school disaster – battle of hayes pond – belvidere apollo theatre collapse – benedict arnold's expedition to quebec – birmingham campaign – blackwater fire of 1937 – boukephala and nikaia – boulton and park – brighton hotel bombing – british contribution to the manhattan project – british hydrogen bomb programme – brown dog affair – boundary fire (2017) – burning of parliament – california gold rush – chalukya dynasty – chicago pile-1 – clinton engineer works – convention of 1832 – convention of 1833 – confederate government of kentucky – coterel gang – croatian spring – danzig street shooting – death of kevin gately – december 1964 south vietnamese coup – discovery expedition – discovery of nuclear fission – discovery of the tomb of tutankhamun – dish-bearers and butlers in anglo-saxon england – dispute between darnhall and vale royal abbey – donner party – double seven day scuffle – early history of gowa and talloq – école polytechnique massacre – ehime maru and uss greeneville collision – empire of brazil – epsom riot – ethiopian historiography – exhumation and reburial of richard iii of england – far eastern party – farthest south – first homosexual movement – first treaty of london – franco-mongol alliance – fredonian rebellion – free state of galveston – french colonization of texas – frye fire – fountain fire – george s. patton slapping incidents – goodwin fire – government of macedonia (ancient kingdom) – great fire of london – great gold robbery – great stink – gunpowder plot – gurian republic – halifax explosion – halifax gibbet – hamlet chicken processing plant fire – han dynasty – high explosive research – history – history of the australian capital territory – history of gibraltar – history of lithuania (1219–1295) – history of poland (1945–1989) – history of solidarity – history of the jews in dęblin and irena during world war ii – history of the yosemite area – hitler diaries – hitler's prophecy – the holocaust in bohemia and moravia – the holocaust in greece – imperial trans-antarctic expedition – international conference on the holocaust and genocide – inter-allied women's conference – iranian embassy siege – jarrow march – jeannette expedition – jersey shore shark attacks of 1916 – john f. kennedy document hoax – june 1941 uprising in eastern herzegovina – july 2009 ürümqi riots – k-25 – keldholme priory election dispute – killing of muhammad al-durrah – king arthur – kingdom of mysore – laika – last voyage of the karluk – littlehampton libels – london beer flood – london monster – loss of mv darlwyne – macedonia (ancient kingdom) – manchester mummy – manhattan project – marmaduke–walker duel – manzanar – marchioness disaster – maya civilization – metallurgical laboratory – ming dynasty – ming–tibet relations – mormon handcart pioneers – murder of julia martha thomas – murder of william de cantilupe – mutiny on the bounty – nansen's fram expedition – natchez revolt – national union of freedom fighters – new south greenland – nimrod expedition – norman conquest – northern bank robbery – northolt siege – nyon conference – oklahoma city bombing – ole miss riot of 1962 – operation barras – operation bernhard – operation boomerang – operation grapple – operation passage to freedom – operation pbfortune – operation pbhistory – operation rösselsprung (1944) – operation transom – operation tungsten – order of brothelyngham – parthian empire – partisan congress riots – peasants' revolt – persecution of homosexuals in nazi germany – peterloo massacre – plymouth colony – political history of medieval karnataka – political history of mysore and coorg (1565–1760) – portland spy ring – project e – project excalibur – quebec agreement – rashtrakuta empire – red barn murder – red river trails – retiarius – rhodesia information centre – röhm scandal – richard roose – ross sea party – runaway scrape – s-50 (manhattan project) – saint-sylvestre coup d'état – sarcophagus of eshmunazar ii – sawmill fire (2017) – sayfo – scotland in the high middle ages – scottish national antarctic expedition – second crusade – securitas depot robbery – senghenydd colliery disaster – september 1964 south vietnamese coup attempt – shackleton–rowett expedition – siege of sidney street – siege of tunis (mercenary war) – singapore strategy – sinking of the titanic – sino-roman relations – smyth report – socialist soviet republic of abkhazia – song dynasty – southern cross expedition – space shuttle challenger disaster – space shuttle columbia disaster – spaghetti house siege – spanish conquest of guatemala – spanish conquest of petén – ss arctic disaster – steamtown, u.s.a. – sy aurora ' s drift – sydney riot of 1879 – tang dynasty – terra nova expedition – texas revolution – tinder fire – tottenham outrage – to the people of texas & all americans in the world – transcaucasian democratic federative republic – treaty of devol – treaty of guînes – trinity (nuclear test) – tube alloys – turabay dynasty – union of bulgaria and romania – us–uk mutual defence agreement – voyage of the james caird – waterloo bay massacre – western chalukya empire – western ganga dynasty – whipping tom – women's poll tax repeal movement – wonderful parliament – x-10 graphite reactor – xá lợi pagoda raids – zanzibar revolution – zeta (fusion reactor) (244 articles) abishabis – abu nidal – samuel adams – al-adid – al-altan – edmund ætheling – ælfwynn, wife of æthelstan half-king – æthelstan a – william t. anderson – elias ashmole – aspasia – alice ayres – alexis bachelot – betsy bakker-nort – blackbeard – james g. blaine – stede bonnet – daniel boone – carsten borchgrevink – james bowie – joel brand – william speirs bruce – guy burgess – henry cornelius burnett – barbara bush – pedro álvares cabral – william calcraft – robert catesby – charles carroll the settler – choe bu – clarence 13x – cleopatra – death of cleopatra – frances cleveland – olga constantinovna of russia – william cooley – william cragh – tom crean (explorer) – edward dando – jefferson davis – death of blair peach – joseph desha – thích quảng đức – charles duke – edward the martyr – hiram wesley evans – fakhr al-din ii – guy fawkes – felix of burgundy – anne frank – pain fitzjohn – james garrard – genghis khan – jacob gens – nicolo giraud – sir william gordon-cumming, 4th baronet – – simon hatley – richard hawes – thomas c. hindman – robert howard hodgkin – lou henry hoover – james humphreys (pornographer) – irataba – frank jenner – joan of arc – ernest joyce – david kelly (weapons expert) – pari khan khanum – shen kuo – edward low – aeneas mackintosh – james madison – elizabeth maitland, duchess of lauderdale – malcolm x – clements markham – ezra meeker – menkauhor kaiu – margaret macpherson grant – harry mcnish – merenre nemtyemsaf i – meurig ab arthfael – khalid al-mihdhar – thomas de la more – benjamin morrell – mukhtar al-thaqafi – r. a. b. mynors – fridtjof nansen – francis nash – andrea navagero – elizabeth needham – hugh de neville – edward oxford – nguyễn chánh thi – roger norreis – mary margaret o'reilly – thomas percy (gunpowder plot) – phan đình phùng – phan xích long – fall of george plantagenet, duke of clarence – jean baptiste point du sable – qalaherriaq – william f. raynolds – l. d. reynolds – robert de umfraville – woodes rogers – ambrose rookwood – edith roosevelt – louis rwagasore – john/eleanor rykener – omayra sánchez – robert falcon scott – laura secord – ernest shackleton – wail al-shehri – jack sheppard – john sherman – shigi qutuqu – sabrina sidney – samantha smith – tarrare – thomas the slav – jean-françois de surville – tecumseh – corry tendeloo – thurisind – james tod – tolui – ignace tonené – john treloar (museum administrator) – francis tresham – stephen trigg – harry r. truman – harriet tubman – dick turpin – urse d'abetot – giovanni villani – jovan vladimir – khalid ibn al-walid – francis walsingham – zeng laishun – zhou tong (archer) – nikita zotov – zufar ibn al-harith al-kilabi (144 articles) bæddel and bædling – bengali language movement – black american sign language – chinese characters – chinese classifier – communication – decipherment of ancient egyptian scripts – gwoyeu romatzyh – levantine arabic – mayan languages – nahuatl – pronunciation of gif – sentence spacing – weise's law (14 articles) lilias armstrong – caroline brady (philologist) – ove jørgensen (3 articles) 2017–2018 bergen county eruv controversy – abdication of edward viii – afroyim v. rusk – ashford v thornton – australian competition and consumer commission v baxter healthcare pty ltd – beauchamp–sharp tragedy – chandler's ford shooting – city of champaign v. madigan – coinage act of 1873 – coinage act of 1965 – court of chancery – death of ian tomlinson – eastbourne manslaughter – ex parte crow dog – gray's inn – greek case – heffernan v. city of paterson – horse protection act of 1970 – illinois public access opinion 16-006 – irish nationality law – israeli citizenship law – jena six – larouche criminal trials – law school of berytus – marshalsea – menominee tribe v. united states – michael brown okinawa assault incident – micronations and the search for sovereignty – murder of leigh leigh – murder of joanna yeates – new zealand nationality law – nuremberg trials – ordinances of 1311 – palsgraf v. long island railroad co. – pendle witches – pepper (inspector of taxes) v hart – regents of the university of california v. bakke – samlesbury witches – saxbe fix – schmerber v. california – section 116 of the constitution of australia – sega v. accolade – shooting of james ashley – shooting of stephen waldorf – shostakovich v. twentieth century-fox film corp. – smith act trials of communist party leaders – tichborne case – united states v. kagama – united states v. lara – united states v. progressive, inc. – united states v. washington – united states v. wong kim ark – voting rights act of 1965 – washington v. texas (54 articles) raymond pace alexander – richard barre – cora agnes benneson – will p. brady – elizabeth canning – melville fuller – ronnie lee gardner – robert garran – william garrow – robert goff, baron goff of chieveley – learned hand – disappearance of natalee holloway – mathew charles lamb – kenesaw mountain landis – albert pierrepoint – wiley rutledge – henry w. sawyer – antonin scalia – elliott fitch shepard – melford stevenson (20 articles) ace books – american writers – anactoria – ancient egyptian literature – anglo-saxon chronicle – archaeology, anthropology, and interstellar communication – beowulf and middle-earth – black hours, morgan ms 493 – dark archives – drapier's letters – dreamsnake – hemming's cartulary – hermeneutic style – a history of british fishes – a history of the birds of europe – homeric hymns – hoysala literature – illustrations of the family of psittacidae, or parrots – lives of the most eminent literary and scientific men – liber eliensis – mars in fiction – nature fakers controversy – ormulum – pilgrim at tinker creek – reception history of jane austen – la salute è in voi – shakespeare authorship question – the story of miss moppet – the structure of literature – sun in fiction – venus in fiction – vijayanagara literature in kannada – walt whitman's lectures on abraham lincoln – western chalukya literature in kannada – when megan went away (35 articles) all god's children need traveling shoes – the autobiography of malcolm x – fun home – gather together in my name – the heart of a woman – history of a six weeks' tour – i know why the caged bird sings – a journey – mom & me & mom – night (memoir) – rambles in germany and italy – singin' and swingin' and gettin' merry like christmas – a song flung up to heaven – david suzuki: the autobiography – themes in maya angelou's autobiographies – true at first light – a voyage round the world (17 articles) the all-story magazine – amazing stories – amazing stories quarterly – analog science fiction and fact – analytical review – archie vs. predator – argosy (magazine) – ashcan comic – asimov's science fiction – astonishing stories – authentic science fiction – battle birds – beyond fantasy fiction – the black cat (us magazine) – cosmic stories and stirring science stories – the covent-garden journal – "a death in the family" (comics) – dime mystery magazine – doc savage (magazine) – eagle (british comics) – famous fantastic mysteries – fantastic (magazine) – fantastic adventures – fantastic novels – fantastic universe – fantasy book – future science fiction and science fiction stories – g-8 and his battle aces – galaxy science fiction – the heart of thomas – ghost stories (magazine) – history of us science fiction and fantasy magazines to 1950 – if (magazine) – imagination (magazine) – imaginative tales – infinity science fiction – john raymond science fiction magazines – kaze to ki no uta – lazarus (comics) – louis riel (comics) – the magazine of fantasy & science fiction – marvel science stories – marvel tales and unusual stories – munsey's magazine – nebula science fiction – new worlds (magazine) – oriental stories – other worlds, universe science fiction, and science stories – planet stories – revival (comics) – roy of the rovers – satellite science fiction – saturn (magazine) – school rumble – science fantasy (magazine) – science fiction adventures (1956 magazine) – science fiction monthly – science-fiction plus – science fiction quarterly – scientific detective monthly – scoops (magazine) – the shadow (magazine) – shojo beat – " sinestro corps war " – the spider (magazine) – startling stories – stucky (fandom) – super-science fiction – super science stories – tales of wonder (magazine) – the thrill book – tintin in the congo – tintin in the land of the soviets – tintin in tibet – tokyo mew mew – tomorrow speculative fiction – uncanny tales (canadian pulp magazine) – unknown (magazine) – venture science fiction – watchmen – weird tales – wonder stories (82 articles) a beautiful crime – bone sharps, cowboys, and thunder lizards – boenga roos dari tjikembang (novel) – the bread-winners – brother jonathan (novel) – burger's daughter – candide – casino royale (novel) – chitty-chitty-bang-bang – a christmas carol – a contract with god – the coral island – cousin bette – diamonds are forever (novel) – the diamond smugglers – the diary of a nobody – dr. no (novel) – dracula – drama dari krakatau – el señor presidente – the fade out – farseer trilogy – the fountainhead – from russia, with love (novel) – the fox and the hound (novel) – the general in his labyrinth – gods' man – goldfinger (novel) – the good terrorist – the great gatsby – the green child – a handful of dust – halo: contact harvest – the halo graphic novel – harvey kurtzman's jungle book – the historian – the hunger games – i never liked you – irish thoroughbred – jonathan strange & mr norrell – la peau de chagrin – lad, a dog – the left hand of darkness – live and let die (novel) – logan (novel) – louis lambert (novel) – madman's drum – the man in the moone – the man with the golden gun (novel) – maus – the monster (novella) – moonraker (novel) – on her majesty's secret service (novel) – the ordeal of gilbert pinfold – paradises lost – pattern recognition (novel) – the penelopiad – père goriot – the phantom tollbooth – the playboy – the portage to san cristobal of a.h. – rachel dyer – raptor red – the red badge of courage – seventy-six (novel) – southern cross (wordless novel) – the spy who loved me (novel) – starship troopers – the sun also rises – the temple at thatch – thunderball (novel) – the time traveler's wife – to kill a mockingbird – uncle tom's cabin – vision in white – a wizard of earthsea – wordless novel – you only live twice (novel) – z. marcas (79 articles) astronomica (manilius) – brothers poem – cento vergilianus de laudibus christi – imagism – the lucy poems – " o captain! my captain! " – " ode on a grecian urn " – " ode on indolence " – poetry of maya angelou – " the raven " – sair tjerita siti akbari – sir gawain and the green knight – " this dust was once the man " – " to autumn " – "ulysses" (poem) – walt whitman and abraham lincoln (16 articles) " big two-hearted river " – " the day before the revolution " – for your eyes only (short story collection) – in our time (short story collection) – " indian camp " – octopussy and the living daylights – " the open boat " (7 articles) allah jang palsoe – allegro (musical) – the author's farce – the bat (play) – black slave's cry to heaven – the blue flame (play) – carousel (musical) – creatures of impulse – dr. jekyll and mr. hyde (1887 play) – the demi-virgin – flower drum song – hamlet – harris theater (chicago) – his majesty's theatre, london – the importance of being earnest – the king and i – new amsterdam theatre – night of january 16th – peking opera – pipe dream (musical) – proserpine (play) – the relapse – romeo and juliet – south pacific (musical) – theatre royal, drury lane – the unconquered (1940 play) – a very merry unauthorized children's scientology pageant (27 articles) allen walker – baron munchausen – black widow (natasha romanova) – goodman beaver – iron man – kenneth widmerpool – mr. dooley – naruto uzumaki (8 articles) lazarus aaronson – chinua achebe – maya angelou – daisy bacon – honoré de balzac – ann bannon – natalie clifford barney – arnold bennett – enid blyton – r. v. c. bodley – neville cardus – ian carmichael – rachel carson – colin robert chase – colley cibber – brunette coleman – corinna – noël coward – stephen crane – john day (printer) – len deighton – emily dickinson – du fu – early life of samuel johnson – isabelle eberhardt – edmund evans – georges feydeau – ian fleming – fuzuli (poet) – stella gibbons – william gibson – w. s. gilbert – lady gregory – george griffith – joseph grimaldi – rufus wilmot griswold – john richard clark hall – amir hamzah – h.d. – ernest hemingway – george herriman – georgette heyer – stanley holloway – oliver wendell holmes sr. – e. w. hornung – ludwig ferdinand huber – israel the grammarian – joehana – joseph johnson (publisher) – samuel johnson – james joyce – franz kafka – lat – ursula k. le guin – john silva meehan – john le mesurier – dan leno – lie kim hok – little tich – marie lloyd – james russell lowell – nigel kneale – h. c. mcneile – olivia manning – francis marrash – master juba – frank matcham – w. somerset maugham – nancy mitford – john neal – laurence olivier – george robey – murasaki shikibu – philitas of cos – harold pinter – edgar allan poe – virginia eliza clemm poe – ezra pound – adelaide anne procter – jean-joseph rabearivelo – ion heliade rădulescu – talbot baines reed – ralph richardson – robert roberts (writer) – j. k. rowling – dorothy l. sayers – olivia shakespear – william shakespeare – george bernard shaw – mary shelley – mary martha sherwood – asylum confinement of christopher smart – john gould stephenson – john millington synge – william beach thomas – j. r. r. tolkien – kurt vonnegut – hugh walpole – evelyn waugh – nathaniel parker willis – p. g. wodehouse – mary wollstonecraft – w. b. yeats (103 articles) 1 − 2 + 3 − 4 + ⋯ – affine symmetric group – algebra – euclidean algorithm – group (mathematics) – logarithm – parity of zero – pi – problem of apollonius – quine–putnam indispensability argument (10 articles) archimedes – georg cantor – leonhard euler – robert hues – émile lemoine – emery molyneux – emmy noether – marian rejewski – edward wright (9 articles) 1937 fox vault fire – dream of the rarebit fiend – flywheel, shyster, and flywheel – format of sesame street – " from the doctor to my son thomas " – grey's anatomy season 17 – history of sesame street – homicide: life on the street season 1 – homicide: life on the street season 2 – illustrated daily news – it's that man again – kare (tv) – kcpq – kexp-fm – kinetoscope – knxv-tv – lost: missing pieces – much-binding-in-the-marsh – mutual broadcasting system – naruto – noitulove – oriental film – paramount television network – parks and recreation season 1 – planet of the apes – the political cesspool – rko pictures – round the horne – sesame street international co-productions – sesame street research – sesame workshop – smallville season 1 – south park season 13 – stephen colbert at the 2006 white house correspondents' dinner – street newspaper – sunderland echo – supernatural season 1 – supernatural season 2 – treehouse of horror – true detective season 1 – the true record – union films – wbpx-tv – winc (am) – wsns-tv – wwj-tv – the yankee – " yes, virginia, there is a santa claus " (48 articles) ? (2011 film) – air mata iboe – aitraaz – aliens (film) – american beauty (1999 film) – anbe sivam – andha naal – asmara moerni – atlantis: the lost empire – baby driver – back to the future – bad times at the el royale – barton fink – the beautician and the beast – bezhin meadow – blackrock (film) – blade runner – boys don't cry (1999 film) – the boys from baghdad high – branded to kill – bride of frankenstein – the cabinet of dr. caligari – cannibal holocaust – the carpet from bagdad – casablanca (film) – casino royale (2006 film) – the cat and the canary (1927 film) – chandralekha (1948 film) – changeling (film) – conan the barbarian (1982 film) – a cure for pokeritis – the dark knight – departures (2008 film) – diary of a camper – die hard – dilwale dulhania le jayenge – djaoeh dimata – dragon: the bruce lee story – dredd – dustbin baby (film) – eega – el camino: a breaking bad movie – the empire strikes back – enthiran – eraserhead – evita (1996 film) – the fifth element – fight club – final fantasy: the spirits within – the fp – frank's cock – frozen 2 – fuck (2005 film) – gagak item – gertie the dinosaur – the getaway (1972 film) – gemini (2002 film) – ghostbusters – ghostbusters ii – the grand budapest hotel – greed (1924 film) – groundhog day (film) – happier than ever: a love letter to los angeles – harta berdarah – hellraiser: judgment – hoodwinked! – hotel chevalier – how a mosquito operates – how brown saw the baseball game – the human centipede (first sequence) – into temptation (film) – it is the law – it's elementary: talking about gay issues in school – jaws (film) – john wick (film) – kahaani – kalidas (film) – kal ho naa ho – katsudō shashin – kedok ketawa – keechaka vadham – lage raho munna bhai – latter days – the legend of bhagat singh – life's shop window – little miss sunshine – little nemo (1911 film) – loev – the lord of the rings (1978 film) – lord of the universe – lost in translation (film) – manhunter (film) – margarita with a straw – mayabazar – meerkat manor: the story begins – mereka bilang, saya monyet! – mind meld – mission: impossible – fallout – mom and dad (1945 film) – mother india – mughal-e-azam – mulholland drive (film) – the mummy (1999 film) – nil battey sannata – not my responsibility – not one less – october 1 (film) – on the job – overdrawn at the memory bank – pah wongso pendekar boediman – paint drying – panggilan darah – parinda – pather panchali – pengkhianatan g30s/pki – persuasion (1995 film) – pride & prejudice (2005 film) – prometheus (2012 film) – pulgasari – raiders of the lost ark – resident evil: apocalypse – the revolution will not be televised (film) – rob-b-hood – robocop – ruma maida – saving private ryan – sense and sensibility (film) – the shawshank redemption – she shoulda said no! – sherlock holmes baffled – sholay – si ronda – si tjonat – the simpsons movie – the sinking of the lusitania – soeara berbisa – sorga ka toedjoe – soultaker (film) – squirm – starship troopers (film) – star trek: first contact – star trek generations – star trek: the motion picture – star trek ii: the wrath of khan – star trek iii: the search for spock – star trek iv: the voyage home – star trek v: the final frontier – star trek vi: the undiscovered country – st. elmo (1914 film) – subway sadie – taare zameen par – tank girl (film) – tender mercies – tenebrae (film) – terang boelan – terminator 2: judgment day – the thing (1982 film) – tjioeng wanara – total recall (1990 film) – trading places – transformers (film) – troika (1969 film) – tropic thunder – the turn of the screw – u2 3d – uncle david – waiting (2015 film) – whisky galore! (1949 film) – the whistleblower – witchfinder general (film) – zodiac (film) – zombie nightmare (172 articles) abby (tv series) – the adventures of brisco county, jr. – adventure time – all souls (tv series) – the american bible challenge – animaniacs – blue's clues – bluey (tv series) – captain scarlet and the mysterons – chains of love (tv series) – the chase (american game show) – cold feet – dark angel (american tv series) – ed, edd n eddy – the emperor's new school – eve (american tv series) – family trade – greed (game show) – hannah montana – head over heels (american tv series) – high school musical: the musical: the series – horrible histories (2009 tv series) – house (tv series) – joking apart – kampung boy (tv series) – katie joplin – lady blue (tv series) – last of the summer wine – love, inc. (tv series) – the masked singer (american tv series) – meerkat manor – mercy point – the million second quiz – one of the boys (1989 tv series) – our friends in the north – the power of nightmares – press gang – pride and prejudice (1995 tv series) – quatermass ii – quatermass and the pit – the random years – the real adventures of jonny quest – revolutionary girl utena – sesame street – shannen says – the simpsons – sonic x – swift justice – temperatures rising – thunderbirds (tv series) – veronica clare – wizards of waverly place (52 articles) "200" ( stargate sg-1 ) – " abyssinia, henry " – "all hell breaks loose" ( supernatural ) – " all things " – aquaman (tv pilot) – " barge of the dead " – "the beginning of the end" ( lost ) – "the bill" (inside no. 9) – "the body" ( buffy the vampire slayer ) – " a canterlot wedding " – " cape feare " – " cartman gets an anal probe " – " the city of new york vs. homer simpson " – " confirmed dead " – "damien" ( south park ) – " deadalive " – " death on the rock " – " did you hear what happened to charlotte king? " – "donald trump" ( last week tonight with john oliver ) – "doomsday" ( doctor who ) – "deep throat" ( the x-files ) – "episode 2" ( twin peaks ) – "episode 14" ( twin peaks ) – "faces" ( star trek: voyager ) – "favorite son" ( star trek: voyager ) – "fresh blood" ( supernatural ) – "gender bender" ( the x-files ) – "give peace a chance" ( grey's anatomy ) – " goodbyeee " – "greatest hits" ( lost ) – " hell is other robots " – "home" ( the x-files ) – " homer's enemy " – " homer's phobia " – "ice" ( the x-files ) – " the joy of sect " – " janet(s) " – "last gasp" ( inside no. 9 ) – " the last temptation of krust " – " lisa the skeptic " – " lisa the vegetarian " – " the man trap " – " meet kevin johnson " – "mother and child reunion" ( degrassi: the next generation ) – "mother's day" ( rugrats ) – " mr. hankey, the christmas poo " – " a nice day for a posh wedding " – "nightswimming" ( awake ) – " no such thing as vampires " – " north by north quahog " – "once more, with feeling" ( buffy the vampire slayer ) – " the other woman ( lost ) " – "over there" ( fringe ) – "partners in crime" ( doctor who ) – "pilot" ( house ) – "pilot" ( parks and recreation ) – "pilot" ( smallville ) – "pilot" ( supernatural ) – "no rest for the wicked" ( supernatural ) – " the post-modern prometheus " – "premiere" ( the o.c. ) – " a quiet night in " – " rejoined " – "the riddle of the sphinx" ( inside no. 9 ) – " road to the multiverse " – " a rugrats chanukah " – " a rugrats kwanzaa " – " san junipero " – "sardines" ( inside no. 9 ) – "say hello to my little friend" ( awake ) – "the shape of things to come" ( lost ) – " sisters at heart " – " the sixth extinction ii: amor fati " – " slapp suits " – " space seed " – "squeeze" ( the x-files ) – " stark raving dad " – " starvin' marvin " – " the stolen earth " – " a streetcar named marge " – "subway" ( homicide: life on the street ) – "terms of endearment" ( the x-files ) – " these are the voyages... " – "through the looking glass" ( lost ) – "triangle" ( the x-files ) – "the truth" ( the x-files ) – "the unnatural" ( the x-files ) – "volcano" ( south park ) – " weight gain 4000 " – "what is and what should never be" ( supernatural ) – " x-cops " – " yesterday's enterprise " – " you only move twice " (93 articles) melanie barnett – c. j. cregg – sadie harris – chad harris-crane – kes ( star trek ) – todd manning – russell family ( passions ) – eve russell – simone russell – bart simpson – homer simpson – khan noonien singh – michael tritter – tasha yar (14 articles) amy adams – ben affleck – ike altgens – angel aquino – andjar asmara – james t. aubrey – kroger babb – vidya balan – christian bale – eric bana – joseph barbera – john barrymore – alia bhatt – harriet bosse – ed bradley – rudolph cartier – nancy cartwright – charlie chaplin – jessica chastain – priyanka chopra – bradley cooper – gary cooper – russell t davies – leonardo dicaprio – walt disney – d. djajakusuma – steve dodd – kirsten dunst – etika – george formby – george formby sr – john gielgud – mckenna grace – jake gyllenhaal – maggie gyllenhaal – william hanna – phil hartman – anne hathaway – katharine hepburn – philip seymour hoffman – tom holland – michael hordern – kenneth horne – nicholas hoult – josh hutcherson – oscar isaac – hattie jacques – peter jennings – scarlett johansson – angelina jolie – katrina kaif – dimple kapadia – kareena kapoor khan – sonam kapoor – shah rukh khan – kalki koechlin – angela lansbury – brie larson – jennifer lawrence – vivien leigh – dolly de leon – angel locsin – jacobus anthonie meessen – marilyn monroe – julianne moore – rani mukerji – cillian murphy – sydney newman – christopher nolan – john oliver – deepika padukone – robert pattinson – freida pinto – brad pitt – kangana ranaut – roekiah – hrithik roshan – judy ann santos – peter sellers – shefali shah – sebastian shaw (actor) – josette simon – red skelton – liza soberano – aaron sorkin – rod steiger – emma stone – terry-thomas – jack l. warner – emma watson – michelle williams (actress) – kate winslet – reese witherspoon – catherine zeta-jones – preity zinta (95 articles) cirrus cloud – eye (cyclone) – climate change (3 articles) 1850 atlantic hurricane season – 1911 atlantic hurricane season – 1933 atlantic hurricane season – 1941 atlantic hurricane season – 1950 atlantic hurricane season – 1983 atlantic hurricane season – 1988 atlantic hurricane season – 1991 atlantic hurricane season – 1994 atlantic hurricane season – 1995 pacific hurricane season – 1998 pacific hurricane season – 2001–02 south-west indian ocean cyclone season – 2002 atlantic hurricane season – 2002 pacific typhoon season – 2003 atlantic hurricane season – 2003 pacific hurricane season – 2005 atlantic hurricane season – 2006 atlantic hurricane season – 2006 pacific hurricane season – 2007 atlantic hurricane season – 2013 atlantic hurricane season (21 articles) 1896 cedar keys hurricane – 1910 cuba hurricane – 1916 texas hurricane – 1928 okeechobee hurricane – 1941 florida hurricane – 1944 cuba–florida hurricane – 1991 perfect storm – 1999 sydney hailstorm – 2000 sri lanka cyclone – 2003 sri lanka cyclone – 2005 azores subtropical storm – christmas 1994 nor'easter – cyclone ada – cyclone althea – cyclone berguitta – cyclone chapala – cyclone dumazile – cyclone elita – cyclone gonu – cyclone joy – cyclone orson – cyclone raja – cyclone rewa – cyclone waka – december 1969 nor'easter – effects of hurricane georges in louisiana – effects of hurricane isabel in delaware – effects of hurricane isabel in maryland and washington, d.c. – effects of hurricane isabel in north carolina – effects of hurricane ivan in the lesser antilles and south america – great lakes storm of 1913 – hurricane alex (2016) – hurricane andrew – hurricane bob (1985) – hurricane bret – hurricane carmen – hurricane carol – hurricane charley (1986) – hurricane cindy (2005) – hurricane claudette (2003) – hurricane connie – hurricane daniel (2006) – hurricane dean – hurricane debbie (1961) – hurricane dennis – hurricane diane – hurricane dog (1950) – hurricane edith (1971) – hurricane elena – hurricane eloise – hurricane emily (1993) – hurricane erika (1997) – hurricane erika (2003) – hurricane fabian – hurricane fay – hurricane fred (2015) – hurricane gert – hurricane ginger – hurricane gonzalo – hurricane gordon (2006) – hurricane grace (1991) – hurricane guillermo (1997) – hurricane hattie – hurricane hazel – hurricane hector (2018) – hurricane hilary – hurricane humberto (2019) – hurricane iniki – hurricane ioke – hurricane irene (2005) – hurricane iris – hurricane isis (1998) – hurricane ismael – hurricane john (1994) – hurricane john (2006) – hurricane juan (1985) – hurricane kate (1985) – hurricane kenna – hurricane kiko (1989) – hurricane kyle (2002) – hurricane lane (2006) – hurricane lane (2018) – hurricane linda (1997) – hurricane lenny – hurricane leslie (2018) – hurricane marie (2014) – hurricane nadine – hurricane nate (2005) – hurricane olivia (2018) – hurricane ophelia (2005) – hurricane rick (2009) – hurricane rosa (2018) – hurricane sergio (2018) – hurricane vince – hurricane walaka – hurricane willa – meteorological history of hurricane dorian – meteorological history of hurricane gordon – meteorological history of hurricane ivan – meteorological history of hurricane jeanne – meteorological history of hurricane patricia – meteorological history of hurricane wilma – racer's hurricane – subtropical storm andrea (2007) – tropical depression nineteen-e (2018) – tropical depression ten (2007) – tropical storm alberto (2006) – tropical storm barry (2001) – tropical storm barry (2007) – tropical storm bill (2003) – tropical storm bonnie (2004) – tropical storm brenda (1960) – tropical storm carlotta (2018) – tropical storm carrie (1972) – tropical storm chantal (2001) – tropical storm cindy (1993) – tropical storm edouard (2002) – tropical storm faxai (2007) – tropical storm gabrielle (2007) – tropical storm hanna (2002) – tropical storm henri (2003) – tropical storm hermine (1998) – tropical storm hernan (2020) – tropical storm ileana (2018) – tropical storm keith (1988) – tropical storm kiko (2007) – tropical storm marco (1990) – tropical storm marco (2008) – tropical storm nicole (2010) – tropical storm vamei – tropical storm vicente (2018) – tropical storm zelda (1991) – typhoon chataan – typhoon gay – typhoon gay (1992) – typhoon maemi – typhoon nabi – typhoon omar – typhoon paka – typhoon pongsona – typhoon rusa – typhoon sudal – typhoon tip (143 articles) album covers of blue note records – the breeders tour 2014 – carillon – choral symphony – concerto delle donne – christgau's record guide: rock albums of the seventies – elderly instruments – english national opera – freedom (concert) – handel's lost hamburg operas – the kinks' 1965 us tour – leningrad première of shostakovich's symphony no. 7 – lost operas by claudio monteverdi – mozart family grand tour – music for a time of war – new wave of british heavy metal – nine inch nails live performances – r2k: the concert – rhinemaidens – roland tr-808 – the royal opera – shoom – taiko – viking metal – zoo tv tour (25 articles) agrippina (opera) – appalachian spring – the bartered bride – blood on the floor (turnage) – carmen – a child of our time – christ lag in todes banden , bwv 4 – der 100. psalm – die zeit, die tag und jahre macht , bwv 134a – erschallet, ihr lieder, erklinget, ihr saiten! , bwv 172 – falstaff (opera) – the firebird – gianni schicchi – h.m.s. pinafore – ich will den kreuzstab gerne tragen , bwv 56 – il ritorno d'ulisse in patria – jesu, meine freude , bwv 227 – jesus nahm zu sich die zwölfe , bwv 22 – komm, du süße todesstunde , bwv 161 – l'ange de nisida – l'arianna – l'incoronazione di poppea – l'orfeo – les pêcheurs de perles – lieutenant kijé (prokofiev) – me and juliet – messiah (handel) – mit fried und freud ich fahr dahin , bwv 125 – nixon in china – noye's fludde – o heilges geist- und wasserbad , bwv 165 – the oceanides – orpheus in the underworld – piano concerto no. 24 (mozart) – piano music of gabriel fauré – piano sonata no. 31 (beethoven) – requiem (reger) – the rite of spring – rinaldo (opera) – saxophone sonata (creston) – sei pezzi per pianoforte – short symphony – sonatas and interludes – symphonic poems (liszt) – symphony no. 3 (górecki) – symphony no. 4 (mahler) – symphony no. 8 (mahler) – symphony no. 8 (sibelius) – thespis (opera) – tosca – trial by jury – vespro della beata vergine – wie schön leuchtet der morgenstern , bwv 1 (53 articles) ...and justice for all (album) – 3 of hearts (album) – 4 (beyoncé album) – 1987 (what the fuck is going on?) – 1989 (album) – aaliyah (album) – achtung baby – aftermath (rolling stones album) – agharta (album) – alicia (album) – all money is legal – almost there (album) – amarte es un placer (album) – anodyne (album) – are you experienced – aries (album) – arular – the basement tapes – be here now (album) – bleed american – blonde on blonde – blood sugar sex magik – body count (album) – born to run – by the way – christ illusion – the concert in central park – confusion (album) – control (janet jackson album) – a crow looked at me – cut the crap – the dark side of the moon – darkness on the edge of town – diorama (silverchair album) – disintegration (the cure album) – dookie – doolittle (album) – dream days at the hotel existence – e.t. the extra-terrestrial (album) – the ecstatic – electra heart – eternal blue (album) – everywhere at the end of time – fantasy black channel – faryl – fearless (taylor swift album) – fijación oral, vol. 1 – the final cut (album) – the first vision – fôrça bruta – formula, vol. 1 – freak out! – the freewheelin' bob dylan – ghosts i–iv – god hates us all – good girl gone bad – good girl gone bad: reloaded – guitar songs – halo 3 original soundtrack – heaven upside down – here is mariah carey – hex enduction hour – hey y'all – highway 61 revisited – ho ho ho (album) – holy wood (in the shadow of the valley of death) – homework (daft punk album) – house of music – hunky dory – the idiot (album) – illinois (sufjan stevens album) – in rainbows – intimacy (bloc party album) – in utero – is this it – it was hot, we stayed in the water – kala (album) – kids see ghosts (album) – kill 'em all – laborintus ii (album) – late registration – lions (album) – love. angel. music. baby. – love it to death – loveless (album) – low (david bowie album) – made in the dark – manos arriba – marquee moon – master of puppets – matangi (album) – maxinquaye – maya (m.i.a. album) – misterioso (thelonious monk album) – a momentary lapse of reason – mother's milk (album) – new york dolls (album) – the next day – niandra lades and usually just a t-shirt – no depression (album) – no line on the horizon – odyssey number five – of human feelings – ok computer – one hot minute – over the rainbow (connie talbot album) – the pale emperor – pinkerton (album) – pod (the breeders album) – pru (album) – red (taylor swift album) – reign in blood – remain in light – rhythm killers – ride the lightning – the river (bruce springsteen album) – rock steady (album) – romance (luis miguel album) – romances (luis miguel album) – rufus does judy at carnegie hall – rumours (album) – the seduction of ingmar bergman – segundo romance – sgt. pepper's lonely hearts club band – silent alarm – sky blue sky – slay tracks: 1933–1969 – smiley smile – song of innocence – sons of soul – south of heaven – speak now – spiderland – still reigning – supernature (goldfrapp album) – surfer rosa – takin' it back – tell all your friends – thank you (meghan trainor album) – this side of the moon – this year's model – thriller (album) – timeless (meghan trainor album) – title (album) – title (ep) – title tk – too much too soon (album) – tragic kingdom – treat myself – a very trainor christmas – virtual self (ep) – vol. 3: (the subliminal verses) – the way i see it – a weekend in the city – when you get a little lonely – windswept adan – wish you were here (pink floyd album) – worlds (porter robinson album) – xx (the xx album) – year zero (album) (160 articles) " 4 minutes " – "the 1975" (song) – "alejandro" (song) – " all about that bass " – " all-american bitch " – " amazing grace " – "angel of death" (slayer song) – "baby boy" (beyoncé song) – "bad blood" (taylor swift song) – " bad romance " – " bale out " – " blank space " – " blindfold me " – "breakdown" (mariah carey song) – "butterfly" (mariah carey song) – " can i get it " – "candy" (foxy brown song) – " can't get you out of my head " – "can't let go" (mariah carey song) – " can't catch me now " – " christmas tree farm " – "city of angels" (thirty seconds to mars song) – " city of blinding lights " – "clown" (mariah carey song) – " cross road blues " – "cry me a river" (justin timberlake song) – " dance in the dark " – " dance the night " – " dear future husband " – "déjà vu" (beyoncé song) – "deja vu" (olivia rodrigo song) – "delicate" (taylor swift song) – "diamonds" (rihanna song) – "don't say you love me" (m2m song) – "don't stop the music" (rihanna song) – " drake would love me " – " easy on me " – "forever" (mariah carey song) – " eyes of the insane " – "feather" (song) – "fearless" (taylor swift song) – " forever & always " – " fuck the millennium " – "gento" (song) – "ghost in the machine" (song) – " get him back! " – " habits (stay high) " – "halo" (beyoncé song) – "here we go again" (ray charles song) – "hey baby" (no doubt song) – " hey jude " – " hey stephen " – "holidays" (meghan trainor song) – "hot sugar" (song) – " how you get the girl " – " i don't remember " – " i don't wanna cry " – " i drink wine " – " i'm god " – " i got that " – "i'm goin' down" – "imagine" (song) – "i need you" (paris hilton song) – " irreplaceable " – " it's a wrap " – " i've just seen a face " – "jihad" (song) – "just like heaven" (the cure song) – " "labyrinth" (taylor swift song) – " laundromat " – " lights up " – " like a rolling stone " – " like i'm gonna lose you " – " lips are movin " – " the long and winding road " – "love story" (taylor swift song) – " love the way you lie " – "made you look" (meghan trainor song) – "me too" (meghan trainor song) – "mindful" (song) – " missing my baby " – "mother" (meghan trainor song) – " mothers of the disappeared " – "my happiness" (powderfinger song) – " my little love " – "my man" (tamar braxton song) – national anthem of russia – "never forget you" (mariah carey song) – "new romantics" (song) – "no" (meghan trainor song) – " no me queda más " – " no panties " – " nothing to my name " – "obsessed" (olivia rodrigo song) – "the one" (tamar braxton song) – "one tree hill" (song) – " on the banks of the wabash, far away " – "open arms" (sza song) – "our song" – " out of the woods " – " paint it black " – " paranoid android " – " photograph of mary " – "push the button" (sugababes song) – " r u professional " – "rehab" (rihanna song) – "running out of time" (song) – "s&m" (song) – " sad eyed lady of the lowlands " – " say say say " – " shake it off " – "shine" (gwen stefani song) – " single ladies (put a ring on it) " – "slug" (song) – " smells like teen spirit " – " smoking on my ex pack " – "something" (beatles song) – " sound and vision " – "speechless" (lady gaga song) – "speechless" (michael jackson song) – " spinning around " – "state of grace" (song) – "streets" (song) – "style" (taylor swift song) – "sweetheart" (rainy davis song) – "talk that talk" (rihanna song) – " talking to yourself " – "telephone" (song) – " this charming man " – "title" (song) – "to be loved" (adele song) – "today" (the smashing pumpkins song) – " touch me i'm sick " – " under the bridge " – vanishing (song) – "village green" (song) – " watching the river flow " – " water under the bridge " – " we are the world " – "welcome to new york" (song) – " what'd i say " – " what you waiting for? " – "white horse" (taylor swift song) – "wildest dreams" – "the world is not enough" (song) – " you belong with me " – " your girl " – " your power " – " you're not sorry " (149 articles) aaliyah – charles-valentin alkan – walter bache – john barbirolli – arnold bax – thomas beecham – bix beiderbecke – william sterndale bennett – hector berlioz – david berman (musician) – georges bizet – pierre boulez – adrian boult – david bowie – benjamin britten – alan bush – mariah carey – cher – frédéric chopin – chrisye – rebecca clarke (composer) – claude debussy – frederick delius – dj am – nick drake – bob dylan – edward elgar – gabriel fauré – kathleen ferrier – rakoto frah – lady gaga – rachelle ann go – percy grainger – ayumi hamasaki – george harrison – jimi hendrix – canadian drug charges and trial of jimi hendrix – death of jimi hendrix – susanna hoffs – gustav holst – imogen holst – janet jackson – michael jackson – mick jagger – eusèbe jaojoby – ken "snakehips" johnson – andrew johnston (singer) – jane joseph – josquin des prez – maynard james keenan – albert ketèlbey – otto klemperer – kyla (filipino singer) – leah labelle – john lennon – kellie loder – lorde – courtney love – steve lukather – witold lutosławski – gustav mahler – miriam makeba – margaret (singer) – jules massenet – paul mccartney – felix mendelssohn – andré messager – olivier messiaen – kylie minogue – pierre monteux – claudio monteverdi – mozart in italy – ram narayan – carl nielsen – the notorious b.i.g. – jacques offenbach – leo ornstein – osbert parsley – katy perry – francis poulenc – elvis presley – angeline quinto – maurice ravel – nikolai rimsky-korsakov – gioachino rossini – camille saint-saëns – joey santiago – robert schumann – bedřich smetana – faryl smith – georg solti – kaikhosru shapurji sorabji – adele spitzeder – jo stafford – charles villiers stanford – ringo starr – gwen stefani – igor stravinsky – arthur sullivan – taylor swift – tōru takemitsu – pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky – michael tippett – meghan trainor – randy travis – ralph vaughan williams – artemy vedel – regine velasquez – cosima wagner – richard wagner – william walton – peter warlock – henry wood – frank zappa (114 articles) alice in chains – audioslave – the beatles – ben&ben – big star – bts – damageplan – fightin' texas aggie band – five go down to the sea? – godsmack – hi-5 (australian group) – jamiroquai – joy division – the kinks – megadeth – meshuggah – metallica – neutral milk hotel – nine inch nails – nirvana (band) – opeth – pearl jam – pink floyd – pixies (band) – powderfinger – radiohead – r.e.m. – sex pistols – silverchair – the smashing pumpkins – stereolab – strapping young lad – pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky and the belyayev circle – pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky and the five – tool (band) – u2 – uncle tupelo – the wiggles – wilco (39 articles) birthday-number effect – confirmation bias – epistemology – ethics – existence – "extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence" – getting it: the psychology of est – an introduction to animals and political theory – logic – metaphysics – mind – name-letter effect – philosophy – political animals and animal politics – throffer – a vindication of the rights of woman (16 articles) eric a. havelock – leucippus – william s. sadler (3 articles) 243 ida – ads/cft correspondence – andromeda (constellation) – antlia – apus – ariel (moon) – aries (constellation) – asteroid belt – atmosphere of jupiter – auriga – barnard's star – betelgeuse – caelum – callisto (moon) – canis major – canis minor – capella – cat's eye nebula – ceres (dwarf planet) – circinus – comet hale–bopp – comet hyakutake – comet shoemaker–levy 9 – corona australis – corona borealis – corvus (constellation) – crater (constellation) – cygnus x-1 – definition of planet – dwarf planet – earth – earth-grazing meteoroid of 13 october 1990 – electron – enceladus – epsilon eridani – eris (dwarf planet) – eta carinae – europa (moon) – formation and evolution of the solar system – galaxy – gamma-ray burst – ganymede (moon) – general relativity – globular cluster – grb 970228 – grb 970508 – grus (constellation) – h ii region – halley's comet – haumea – herbig–haro object – history of mars observation – horologium (constellation) – hubble deep field – hubble space telescope – hydrus – ik pegasi – introduction to general relativity – io (moon) – island of stability – jupiter trojan – kreutz sungrazer – kuiper belt – laplace–runge–lenz vector – leo minor – lynx (constellation) – m-theory – magnetosphere of jupiter – main sequence – makemake – mars – mensa (constellation) – mercury (planet) – messier 87 – microscopium – mirror symmetry (string theory) – moon – musca – nebular hypothesis – neptune – norma (constellation) – oberon (moon) – oort cloud – pavo (constellation) – perseus (constellation) – phoenix (constellation) – pictor – planet – planet nine – planets beyond neptune – pluto – proxima centauri – pyxis – quark – redshift – rigel – rings of jupiter – rings of neptune – rings of uranus – sagitta – saturn – scattered disc – sedna (dwarf planet) – serpens – sirius – solar eclipse – solar system – solrad 1 – solrad 2 – speed of light – star – sun – supernova – tau ceti – telescopium – titan (moon) – titania (moon) – toronto magnetic and meteorological observatory – trappist-1 – triangulum – triangulum australe – triton (moon) – tucana – umbriel – uranus – ursa minor – vega – venus – virgo interferometer – volcanism on io – white dwarf (131 articles) buzz aldrin – neil armstrong – niels bohr – frank borman – james chadwick – michael collins (astronaut) – jürgen ehlers – enrico fermi – richard feynman – anna lee fisher – eunice newton foote – ben gascoigne – josiah willard gibbs – otto hahn – johannes kepler – george koval – jim lovell – shannon lucid – ulf merbold – mark oliphant – lise meitner – mercury seven – nasa astronaut group 2 – gerard k. o'neill – j. robert oppenheimer – oppenheimer security clearance hearing – isidor isaac rabi – judith resnik – sally ride – david scott – rhea seddon – louis slotin – kathryn d. sullivan – edward teller – alfred worden – john young (astronaut) – zhang heng (37 articles) 1867 united states senate election in pennsylvania – 1880 democratic national convention – 1880 greenback national convention – 1880 republican national convention – 1898 united states senate elections in ohio – 1899 kentucky gubernatorial election – 1899 united states senate election in pennsylvania – january 1908 irish representative peer election – 1927 chicago mayoral election – 1937 social credit backbenchers' revolt – 1946 california's 12th congressional district election – 1950 united states senate election in california – 1951 philadelphia municipal election – 1955 state of vietnam referendum – 1957 canadian federal election – 1975 australian constitutional crisis – 2009 new york's 20th congressional district special election – 1964 illinois house of representatives election – 2010 united states senate democratic primary election in pennsylvania – 2016 sleaford and north hykeham by-election – 2020 missouri amendment 2 – act of accord – ba congress – balfour declaration – boroughitis – bring us together – john edward brownlee sex scandal – william jennings bryan 1896 presidential campaign – checkers speech – cross of gold speech – "daisy" (advertisement) – draft eisenhower movement – gateway protection programme – government of the han dynasty – governor of kentucky – first inauguration of barack obama – william henry harrison 1840 presidential campaign – league of nations – the may pamphlet – william mckinley 1896 presidential campaign – ministerial by-election – ngo dinh diem presidential visit to australia – new jersey's 1927 biannual elections proposal – " on the mindless menace of violence " – operation sandwedge – ostend manifesto – overman committee – parliament of 1327 – profumo affair – privy council (united kingdom) – referendum party – ross perot 1992 presidential campaign – rudd concession – strom thurmond filibuster of the civil rights act of 1957 – thaddeus mccotter 2012 presidential campaign – thorpe affair – harry s. truman 1948 presidential campaign – việt nam quốc dân đảng – a vindication of the rights of men – why marx was right (60 articles) john adair – john adams – spiro agnew – nadezhda alliluyeva – yasser arafat – carlos castillo armas – chester a. arthur – alexandre banza – alben w. barkley – thomas f. bayard – hugh beadle – louis h. bean – j. c. w. beckham – judah p. benjamin – steve biko – luke p. blackburn – barthélemy boganda – jean bolikango – margaret bondfield – william borah – horatio bottomley – william o'connell bradley – bessie braddock – john c. breckinridge – political career of john c. breckinridge – john y. brown (politician, born 1835) – john edward brownlee as attorney general of alberta – stanley bruce – simon bolivar buckner – morgan bulkeley – john c. calhoun – honório hermeto carneiro leão, marquis of paraná – neville chamberlain – happy chandler – murray chotiner – grover cleveland – jane cobden – martha layne collins – bert combs – calvin coolidge – john sherman cooper – richard cordray – john j. crittenden – s. o. davies – bill denny – phoolan devi – john diefenbaker – benjamin disraeli – alec douglas-home – neal dow – tom driberg – don dunstan – early life and military career of john mccain – william hayden english – millard fillmore – ernie fletcher – joseph b. foraker – wendell ford – james a. garfield – emma goldman – horace greeley – herbert greenfield – frank hague – mark hanna – warren g. harding – benjamin harrison – john hay – rutherford b. hayes – john l. helm – patrick henry – garret hobart – margaret lea houston – c. d. howe – andrew jackson – muhammad ali jinnah – andrew johnson – keen johnson – jomo kenyatta – nikita khrushchev – ruby laffoon – nestor lakoba – franklin knight lane – george lansbury – vladimir lenin – leopold report – albert levitt – david lewis (canadian politician) – li rui – marcel lihau – huey long – luo yixiu – angus lewis macdonald – john a. macdonald – gregor macgregor – william lyon mackenzie – nelson mandela – thomas r. marshall – evelyn mase – george mason – john mccain – james b. mccreary – william mckinley – simonie michael – harvey milk – edwin p. morrow – socrates nelson – ngô đình cẩn – nguyễn ngọc thơ – pat nixon – richard nixon – louie nunn – sergo ordzhonikidze – josé paranhos, viscount of rio branco – paul e. patton – franklin peale – franklin pierce – józef piłsudski – gabriel pleydell – thomas playford iv – james k. polk – premiership of john edward brownlee – matthew quay – vidkun quisling – rainilaiarivony – norodom ranariddh – samuel j. randall – ronald reagan – richard gavin reid – louis riel – ernest roberts (australian politician) – john rolph – george w. romney – mitt romney – rise of neville chamberlain – juan manuel de rosas – frank russell, 2nd earl russell – alexander cameron rutherford – charles scott (governor) – jason sendwe – william h. seward – solomon p. sharp – isaac shelby – arthur sifton – sjafruddin prawiranegara – addie viola smith – albert speer – augustus owsley stanley – thaddeus stevens – charles stewart (premier) – sumitro djojohadikusumo – william howard taft – james thompson (surveyor) – jeremy thorpe – benjamin tillman – john tonkin – harry s. truman – liz truss – irakli tsereteli – george tucker (author) – john tyler – john tyndall (far-right activist) – fakih usman – jerry voorhis – george washington – george washington and slavery – james b. weaver – lawrence wetherby – beverly white – thomas white (australian politician) – gough whitlam – william wilberforce – ellen wilkinson – wendell willkie (173 articles) 2012 phenomenon – the age of reason – ahalya – ancient egyptian deities – anekantavada – apocalypse of peter – augustinian theodicy – badnjak (serbian) – beth hamedrash hagodol – blue men of the minch – bonshō – cardinal-nephew – congregation baith israel anshei emes – congregation beth elohim – dali (goddess) – diocletianic persecution – english benedictine reform – first roumanian-american congregation – free and candid disquisitions – ganesha – gospel of the ebionites – gregorian mission – hathor – heathenry (new religious movement) – intelligent design – iravan – isis – jc's girls – kelpie – kharijites – mysteries of isis – netley abbey – ninety-five theses – nuckelavee – oran fatwa – orion (mythology) – osiris myth – our lady of perpetual exemption – palo (religion) – priestley riots – problem of religious language – prosperity theology – qibla – rastafari – st. michael's cathedral, qingdao – santería – ten commandments in catholic theology – temple israel (memphis, tennessee) – temple sinai (oakland, california) – westminster assembly – vampire – vithoba – xenu (53 articles) ælfheah of canterbury – alexander of lincoln – asser – augustine of canterbury – baldwin of forde – john w. beschter – william m. branham – martin bucer – david hillhouse buel (priest) – robert burnell – john calvin – robert de chesney – clement of dunblane – henry conwell – walter de coutances – walter de coventre – thomas cranmer – mandell creighton – cyfeilliog – harold davidson – randall davidson – deusdedit of canterbury – james a. doonan – ealdred (archbishop of york) – william feiner – benedict joseph fenwick – enoch fenwick – michael francis egan – gilbert foliot – geoffrey (archbishop of york) – gerard (archbishop of york) – giovanni antonio grassi – henry (bishop of finland) – george went hensley – hilary of chichester – reginald heber – hensley henson – herman the archdeacon – anne hutchinson – hygeberht – jesus – john de gray – jocelin of glasgow – paul palaiologos tagaris – peter jones (missionary) – julian of norwich – justus – john knox – cosmo gordon lang – laurence of canterbury – john littlejohn (preacher) – william de longchamp – joseph a. lopez – bernard a. maguire – william matthews (priest) – madeline montalban – william mcsherry – mellitus – samuel mulledy – francis neale – ralph neville – nicholas of worcester – nigel (bishop of ely) – ruth norman – paulinus of york – robert of jumièges – elias abraham rosenberg – james a. ryder – william de st-calais – pope sisinnius – andrew sledd – albertus soegijapranata – stigand – charles h. stonestreet – theobald of bec – thomas of bayeux – peter martyr vermigli – hubert walter – william warelwast – wilfrid – william de corbeil – william of tyre – william of wrotham – huldrych zwingli (84 articles) 1937 tour of germany by the duke and duchess of windsor – ancestry of the godwins – baljuna covenant – family of gediminas – house of plantagenet – hungarian nobility – kalākaua's 1881 world tour – loveday (1458) – representative peer – royal maundy (10 articles) abd al-malik ibn marwan – áedán mac gabráin – ælle of sussex – æthelbald of mercia – æthelbald, king of wessex – æthelberht of kent – æthelberht, king of wessex – æthelflæd – æthelred i of wessex – æthelred of mercia – æthelred, lord of the mercians – æthelstan – æthelwold ætheling – æthelwulf, king of wessex – afonso, prince imperial of brazil – pedro afonso, prince imperial of brazil – ahmose i – alice of champagne – al-hafiz – al-mu'tadid – al-mu'tasim – al-musta'li – al-muti' – al-walid i – prince albert of saxe-coburg and gotha – prince albert victor, duke of clarence and avondale – alboin – aldfrith of northumbria – alexandra of denmark – alexander of greece – prince alfred of great britain – princess alice of battenberg – grand duchess anastasia nikolaevna of russia – anna of east anglia – anne of denmark – anne, queen of great britain – antiochus x eusebes – antiochus xi epiphanes – antiochus xii dionysus – atlanersa – attalus i – augustus – basiliscus – princess beatrice of the united kingdom – beorhtwulf of mercia – john bingham, 7th earl of lucan – bodashtart – william bonville, 1st baron bonville – brochfael ap meurig – george calvert, 1st baron baltimore – caroline of ansbach – cædwalla – ceawlin of wessex – chagatai khan – charles i of anjou – charles i of england – charles ii of england – princess charlotte of wales (1796–1817) – rachel chiesley, lady grange – christopher lekapenos – john churchill, 1st duke of marlborough – cleopatra selene of syria – henry clifford, 10th baron clifford – coenred of mercia – coenwulf of mercia – constans ii (son of constantine iii) – constantine ii of scotland – constantine iii (western roman emperor) – constantine (son of basil i) – constantine (son of theophilos) – david i of scotland – david (son of heraclius) – diocletian – djedkare isesi – domitian – donnchadh, earl of carrick – eadbald of kent – eadred – eadwig – eardwulf of northumbria – ecgberht, king of wessex – edgar, king of england – edmund i – edward i of england – edward ii of england – edward vi – edward vii – edward viii – edward the elder – elizabeth i – elizabeth ii – queen elizabeth the queen mother – ernest augustus, king of hanover – demetrius iii eucaerus – john fitzwalter, 2nd baron fitzwalter – frederick iii, german emperor – frederick the great – prince george of denmark – george i of great britain – george i of greece – george ii of great britain – george iii – george iv – george v – george vi – glycerius – john hastings, 2nd earl of pembroke – princess helena of the united kingdom – henry i of england – henry ii of england – henry iii of england – henry iv, holy roman emperor – hö'elün – hurra-yi khuttali – ine of wessex – isabeau of bavaria – ismail i of granada – james vi and i – james ii of england – jochi – john, king of england – abdul karim (the munshi) – nikolai kulikovsky – harriet leveson-gower, countess granville – princess louise, duchess of argyll – manuel i komnenos – marcian – mu'awiya i – princess maria amélia of brazil – martinus (son of heraclius) – marwan i – mary of teck – mary ii – mary, queen of scots – empress matilda – maximian – catherine de' medici – john mowbray, 3rd duke of norfolk – muhammad i of granada – muhammad ii of granada – muhammad iii of granada – muhammad iv of granada – muhammad ibn tughj al-ikhshid – nasr of granada – neferefre – neferirkare kakai – nizar ibn al-mustansir – nyuserre ini – prince octavius of great britain – odaenathus – óengus i – offa of mercia – grand duchess olga alexandrovna of russia – grand duchess olga nikolaevna of russia – andreas palaiologos – pedro i of brazil – pedro ii of brazil – penda of mercia – pepi i meryre – philip i philadelphus – ramesses vi – ranavalona i – ranavalona iii – raymond iii, count of tripoli – raynald of châtillon – rhys ap gruffydd – richard ii of england – william de ros, 6th baron ros – sadruddin aga khan – sahure – lady saigō – salih ibn mirdas – teresa sampsonia – charles edward, duke of saxe-coburg and gotha – sayf al-dawla – seleucus vi epiphanes – domenico selvo – sennacherib – shepseskaf – shepseskare – sheshi – shunzhi emperor – simeon i of bulgaria – siward, earl of northumbria – humphrey stafford, 1st duke of buckingham – stephen i of hungary – stephen, king of england – charlotte stuart, duchess of albany – sulayman ibn abd al-malik – teresa cristina of the two sicilies – thekla (daughter of theophilos) – theodore ii laskaris – theodosius iii – tiberius iii – unas – userkaf – princess victoria of hesse and by rhine – queen victoria – wallis simpson – wiglaf of mercia – wihtred of kent – william iii of england – william iv – william the conqueror – prince william, duke of gloucester – wulfhere of mercia – władysław ii jagiełło – yazid i – yusuf i of granada – alexander ii zabinas – zenobia (211 articles) 1873 fa cup final – 1876 fa cup final – 1876 scotland v wales football match – 1878 fa cup final – 1894–95 new brompton f.c. season – 1905–06 new brompton f.c. season – 1906–07 new brompton f.c. season – 1907–08 new brompton f.c. season – 1911–12 new brompton f.c. season – 1912–13 gillingham f.c. season – 1913–14 gillingham f.c. season – 1914 fa cup final – 1914–15 gillingham f.c. season – 1919–20 gillingham f.c. season – 1920–21 burnley f.c. season – 1920–21 cardiff city f.c. season – 1920–21 gillingham f.c. season – 1921–22 cardiff city f.c. season – 1923 fa cup final – 1925 fa cup final – 1927 fa cup final – 1929–30 gillingham f.c. season – 1937–38 gillingham f.c. season – 1940 mandatory palestine v lebanon football match – 1950–51 gillingham f.c. season – 1956 fa cup final – 1959–60 burnley f.c. season – 1963–64 gillingham f.c. season – 1964 european nations' cup final – 1973 fa charity shield – 1973–74 gillingham f.c. season – 1978 fa cup final – 1980–81 ipswich town f.c. season – 1981 uefa cup final – 1981–82 gillingham f.c. season – 1982–83 gillingham f.c. season – 1983–84 gillingham f.c. season – 1984–85 gillingham f.c. season – 1985–86 gillingham f.c. season – 1986–87 gillingham f.c. season – 1987 fa cup final – 1987 football league third division play-off final – 1987–88 gillingham f.c. season – 1988 football league second division play-off final – 1988–89 gillingham f.c. season – 1989–90 gillingham f.c. season – 1990–91 gillingham f.c. season – 1991–92 gillingham f.c. season – 1992–93 gillingham f.c. season – 1993 football league first division play-off final – 1993–94 gillingham f.c. season – 1994–95 gillingham f.c. season – 1995–96 gillingham f.c. season – 1996–97 gillingham f.c. season – 1997 football league first division play-off final – 1997–98 gillingham f.c. season – 1998 fa charity shield – 1998 fifa world cup final – 1998 football league first division play-off final – 1998–99 gillingham f.c. season – 1999–2000 gillingham f.c. season – 1999 fifa women's world cup – 1999 football league first division play-off final – 1999 football league second division play-off final – 2000 football league second division play-off final – 2000–01 gillingham f.c. season – 2001 football league first division play-off final – 2001–02 gillingham f.c. season – 2001 uefa cup final – 2002 football league first division play-off final – 2002–03 gillingham f.c. season – 2003–04 gillingham f.c. season – 2003–04 arsenal f.c. season – 2004–05 gillingham f.c. season – 2006 football league championship play-off final – 2009 football league two play-off final – 2009 u.s. open cup final – 2009–10 notts county f.c. season – 2010 football league championship play-off final – 2010 u.s. open cup final – 2011 u.s. open cup final – 2013 fa cup final – 2014 fifa world cup final – 2014 u.s. open cup final – 2015 africa cup of nations final – 2015 fa cup final – 2015 knvb cup final – 2016 fa cup final – 2017 africa cup of nations final – 2017 efl championship play-off final – 2017 efl trophy final – 2017 fa cup final – 2018 efl league two play-off final – 2018 fa cup final – 2019 fa cup final – 2020 fa cup final – 2020 seattle sounders fc season – 2022–23 notts county f.c. season – ac monza – anfield – arsenal women 11–1 bristol city women – fc bayern munich 1–2 norwich city f.c. (1993) – belgium national football team – blackburn olympic f.c. – bootham crescent – burnley f.c. – burnley f.c. in european football – cardiff city f.c. – cardiff city f.c. 2–1 leeds united f.c. (2002) – carlton town f.c. – carrow road – central coast mariners fc – chelsea f.c. – city of manchester stadium – coventry city 2–2 bristol city (1977) – dover athletic f.c. – england national football team manager – fc porto in international football – fifa world cup – gedling town f.c. – germany women's national football team – gillingham f.c. – history of arsenal f.c. (1886–1966) – history of aston villa f.c. (1961–present) – history of bradford city a.f.c. – history of burnley f.c. – history of gillingham f.c. – history of ipswich town f.c. – history of liverpool f.c. (1892–1959) – history of liverpool f.c. (1959–1985) – history of liverpool f.c. (1985–present) – history of norwich city f.c. – history of stoke city f.c. – history of tottenham hotspur f.c. – history of the wales national football team (1876–1976) – history of york city f.c. (1922–1980) – history of york city f.c. (1980–present) – ipswich town f.c. – kit (association football) – luton town f.c. – leek town f.c. – liverpool f.c. – liverpool f.c. in international football – malmö ff – manchester city f.c. – manchester united f.c. – manchester united f.c. 9–0 ipswich town f.c. – margate f.c. – mls cup 1996 – mls cup 1999 – mls cup 2019 – mls cup 2022 – ninian park – north road, manchester – norwich city f.c. – okęcie airport incident – old trafford – peru national football team – portman road – premier league – priestfield stadium – scotland national football team – seattle sounders fc – stocksbridge park steels f.c. – suicidal tour – sutton united 2–1 coventry city (1989) – turf moor – uefa euro 1976 final – uefa euro 2004 final – uefa euro 2008 final – uefa euro 2012 final – uefa euro 2016 final – uefa euro 2020 final – valley parade – villa park – wales national football team home stadium – york city f.c. (177 articles) 1912 suspension of ty cobb – 1926 world series – 2004 world series – 2009 world series – baseball – brooklyn dodgers 1, boston braves 1 (26 innings) – first horizon park – herschel greer stadium – history of the nashville sounds – history of the new york yankees – nashville sounds – orel hershiser's scoreless innings streak – philadelphia athletics 18, cleveland indians 17 (1932) – posting system – riders field – youngstown ohio works (16 articles) jesus college boat club (oxford) – the boat race 1993 – the boat race 2003 – the boat race 2012 – the boat races 2015 – the boat races 2016 – the boat races 2017 – the boat race 2018 – the boat race 2019 – the boat race 2020 – the boat race 2021 – the boat race 2022 (12 articles) first test, 1948 ashes series – second test, 1948 ashes series – third test, 1948 ashes series – fourth test, 1948 ashes series – fifth test, 1948 ashes series – 2003 cricket world cup final – 2009 women's cricket world cup final – 2010 twenty20 cup final – adelaide leak – bodyline – d'oliveira affair – john the bookmaker controversy – leg before wicket – somerset county cricket club in 1891 – somerset county cricket club in 2009 – van diemen's land v port phillip, 1851 – west indian cricket team in england in 1988 – worcestershire v somerset, 1979 – yorkshire captaincy affair of 1927 (19 articles) 1927 world snooker championship – 1980 world snooker championship – 1981 world snooker championship – 1982 world snooker championship – 1983 world snooker championship – 1984 world snooker championship – 1985 world snooker championship – 1985 world snooker championship final – 1986 world snooker championship – 1987 world snooker championship – 1988 world snooker championship – 1989 world snooker championship – 2002 world snooker championship – 2007 world cup of pool – 2014 world snooker championship – 2015 world snooker championship – 2016 world snooker championship – 2017 world snooker championship – 2018 world snooker championship – 2019 world snooker championship – 2019 champion of champions – 2019 tour championship – 2019 wpa world ten-ball championship – 2020 world snooker championship – 2020 masters (snooker) – 2020 tour championship – 2021 british open – 2021 masters (snooker) – 2021 tour championship – 2021 world snooker championship – 2022 hong kong masters – 2022 masters (snooker) – 2022 tour championship – 2022 welsh open (snooker) – 2022 world snooker championship – 2023 world snooker championship – snooker (37 articles) 1962 tour de france – 1985 tour de france – 1987 giro d'italia – 1988 giro d'italia – 1989 tour de france – 2009 giro d'italia – 2012 tour de france – 2015 vuelta a españa – cycling at the 2008 summer olympics – men's individual road race – cycling at the 2008 summer olympics – women's individual road race (10 articles) american pharoah – barbara l – calgary stampede – california chrome – chariot racing – chicado v – easy jet (horse) – fleetwood park racetrack – go man go – jersey act – lightning bar – miss meyers – mucho macho man – oxbow (horse) – secretariat (horse) – shergar – thunder (mascot) (17 articles) 1921 centre vs. harvard football game – 1924 rose bowl – 1998 nfc championship game – 2000 sugar bowl – 2003 insight bowl – 2005 acc championship game – 2005 sugar bowl – 2005 texas longhorns football team – 2006 chick-fil-a bowl – 2006 gator bowl – 2007 acc championship game – 2007 appalachian state vs. michigan football game – 2007 usc trojans football team – 2008 acc championship game – 2008 humanitarian bowl – 2008 orange bowl – 2009 international bowl – 2009 orange bowl – 2010 papajohns.com bowl – carolina panthers – heidi game – history of american football – history of the new york jets – packers sweep (24 articles) calgary flames – calgary hitmen – fighting in ice hockey – history of the montreal canadiens – history of the national hockey league (1917–1942) – history of the national hockey league (1942–1967) – history of the national hockey league (1967–1992) – hockey hall of fame – ice hockey at the olympic games – kenora thistles – new jersey devils – stanley cup – zimbabwe women's national field hockey team at the 1980 summer olympics (13 articles) 1906 french grand prix – 1982 formula one world championship – 1995 japanese grand prix – 1995 pacific grand prix – 2005 united states grand prix – 2006 bank of america 500 – 2006 subway 500 – 2006 uaw-ford 500 – 2007 at&t 250 – 2007 coca-cola 600 – 2008 brazilian grand prix – 2008 hungarian grand prix – 2008 japanese grand prix – 2008 monaco grand prix – 2008 uaw-dodge 400 – 2010 sylvania 300 – 2012 budweiser shootout – 2014 japanese grand prix – 2015 formula one world championship – brabham bt19 (20 articles) 1896 summer olympics – 1952 winter olympics – 1956 winter olympics – australia at the winter olympics – australia women's national wheelchair basketball team at the 2012 summer paralympics – bids for the 2012 summer olympics (6 articles) cmll world light heavyweight championship – cmll world middleweight championship – december to dismember (2006) – money in the bank (2011) – no way out (2004) – over the edge (1999) – summerslam (2003) – the great american bash (2005) – tna lockdown (2008) – tna turning point (2008) – wrestle kingdom 9 (11 articles) 1877 wimbledon championship – 1910 london to manchester air race – 2012–13 michigan wolverines men's basketball team – 44th chess olympiad – belle vue zoological gardens – broad ripple park carousel – compulsory figures – cotswold olimpick games – dungeons & dragons – first-move advantage in chess – sheikra – expedition to the barrier peaks – falcon's fury – gateshead international stadium – gliding – grey cup – hare coursing – hyborian war – ice dance – iron gwazi – lumen field – millennium force – parachute jump – quietly confident quartet – ravenloft (module) – underwater diving – wales national rugby union team – york park (28 articles) margaret abbott – doc adams – nick adenhart – jonathan agnew – gubby allen – tommy amaker – hobey baker – mark baldwin (baseball) – sid barnes – billy bates (baseball) – kevin beattie – geoff bent – moe berg – brian booth – bernard bosanquet (cricketer) – luc bourdon – don bradman – eric brewer (ice hockey) – c. o. brocato – martin brodeur – neil brooks – bill brown (cricketer) – william robinson brown – steve bruce – avery brundage – paige bueckers – mike capel – rudolf caracciola – percy chapman – ian chappell – leroy chollet – caitlin clark – kim clijsters – cliff clinkscales – cm punk – paul collingwood – a. e. j. collins – learie constantine – stan coveleski – ian craig – jack crawford (cricketer) – ben crosby – walter donaldson (snooker player) – bud dunn – duncan edwards – thomas ellison – ray emery – peter evans (swimmer) – richie farmer – bob feller – percy fender – hughie ferguson – nikita filatov – theoren fleury – george floyd (american football) – dan fouts – robin friday – dave gallaher – eddie gerard – adam gilchrist – arthur gilligan – michael gomez – george h. d. gossip – arthur gould (rugby union) – chris gragg – otto graham – wayne gretzky – terry griffiths – orval grove – bryan gunn – wally hammond – yuzuru hanyu olympic seasons – dominik hašek – george headley – paul henderson – thierry henry – herbie hewett – clem hill – damon hill – lynn hill – bernard hinault – george hirst – jack hobbs – rogers hornsby – art houtteman – juwan howard – paul hunter – len hutton – derek jeter – jarome iginla – archie jackson – douglas jardine – ian johnson (cricketer) – keith johnson (cricket administrator) – magic johnson – michael jordan – masako katsura – fred keenor – susi kentikian – mark kerry – craig kieswetter – harmon killebrew – roy kilner – bart king – sandy koufax – nodar kumaritashvili – harold larwood – louis leblanc – faith leech – suzanne lenglen – maurice leyland – trevor linden – ray lindwall with the australian cricket team in england in 1948 – tara lipinski – sam loxton – sam loxton with the australian cricket team in england in 1948 – roberto luongo – charlie macartney – george macaulay – archie maclaren – manon melis – bob mann (american football) – john manners (cricketer) – jack marsh – billy martin – jimmy mcaleer – lanny mcdonald – frank mcgee (ice hockey) – john mcgraw – william mcgregor (football) – mechanical turk – ian meckiff – bob meusel – arthur mold – howie morenz – sandra morgan – arthur morris – stan musial – ian o'brien – kevin o'halloran – bill o'reilly (cricketer) – johnny owen – lionel palairet – ben paschal – daisy pearce – bobby peel – erin phillips – tommy phillips – jacques plante – robert poore – bill ponsford – john pulman – alf ramsey – milos raonic – ray reardon – angel reese – stamata revithi – wilfred rhodes – maurice richard – jochen rindt – mariano rivera – iwan roberts – jackie robinson – bobby robson – art ross – bill russell – babe ruth – rex ryan – joe sakic – tessa sanderson – sigi schmid – james scott (boxer) – daniel sedin – henrik sedin – waisale serevi – tom simpson – tyler skaggs – lee smith (baseball) – ozzie smith – john spencer (snooker player) – casey stengel – eduard streltsov – hod stuart – don tallon – bazy tankersley – cyclone taylor – jim thome – tiny thompson – cliff thorburn – ian thorpe – jim thorpe – billy joe tolliver – mark tonelli – ernie toshack – ernie toshack with the australian cricket team in england in 1948 – bert trautmann – marcus trescothick – harry trott – hugh trumble – thurman tucker – morihei ueshiba – hedley verity – georges vézina – abe waddington – joe warbrick – john wark – tyrone wheatley – fatima whitbread – anna wilson (basketball) – bob windle – fanny bullock workman – william wurtenburg – teddy wynyard – yao ming – scott zolak (215 articles) transportation during the 2024 summer olympics and paralympics (1 article) 1955 macarthur airport united air lines crash – air-tractor sledge – american airlines flight 11 – american airlines flight 77 – boeing 747 – boeing 757 – boeing 767 – boeing 777 – gol transportes aéreos flight 1907 – pan am flight 7 – pan am flight 214 – paradise airlines flight 901a – supermarine s.4 – united airlines flight 93 – westjet encore (15 articles) baltimore steam packet company – girl pat – kennet and avon canal – manchester bolton & bury canal – manchester ship canal – mary celeste – sinking of ss princess alice – ss choctaw – ss christopher columbus – ss dakotan – ss edmund fitzgerald – ss edward l. ryerson – ss kroonland – ss mauna loa – ss minnesotan – ss montanan – ss ohioan (1914) – ss pennsylvanian – ss politician – ss washingtonian (20 articles) 1 line (sound transit) – a and b loop – airport central railway station – airtrain jfk – aldwych tube station – baker street and waterloo railway – bennerley viaduct – branford steam railroad – brill railway station – brill tramway – canoe river train crash – carolwood pacific railroad – cedar hill yard – central london railway – changi airport mrt station – charing cross, euston and hampstead railway – chinatown mrt station – city and south london railway – city hall mrt station – daglish railway station – dhoby ghaut mrt station – disneyland railroad – downtown seattle transit tunnel – droxford railway station – eastern suburbs & illawarra line – edmonds station (washington) – esplanade mrt station – great north of scotland railway – great northern, piccadilly and brompton railway – green park tube station – hastings line – hellingly hospital railway – herne hill railway station – horseshoe curve (pennsylvania) – kinzua bridge – lake street transfer station – manila light rail transit system – marina bay mrt station – marshfield station – max orange line – max red line – max yellow line – metropolitan railway – moorgate tube crash – new paltz station – niagara falls suspension bridge – nicoll highway mrt station – north east mrt line – opening of the liverpool and manchester railway – providence and worcester railroad – quainton road railway station – raffles place mrt station – rogers locomotive and machine works – rosendale trestle – saline valley salt tram – seattle center monorail – south lake union streetcar – stockton and darlington railway – talyllyn railway – toa payoh mrt station – tukwila international boulevard station – tunnel railway – underground electric railways company of london – union station (erie, pennsylvania) – university of washington station – waddesdon road railway station – walt disney world railroad – weesperplein metro station – westcott railway station – wolverton viaduct – wood river branch railroad – wood siding railway station – woodleigh mrt station – wotton railway station (brill tramway) (74 articles) hi-level – hogwarts express (universal orlando resort) – john bull (locomotive) – johnstown inclined plane – lswr n15 class – royal blue (train) – secr k and sr k1 classes – secr n class – sr leader class – sr merchant navy class – sr west country and battle of britain classes – superliner (railcar) – turboliner (13 articles) albert bridge, london – atlantic city–brigantine connector – battersea bridge – bp pedestrian bridge – brockway mountain drive – california state route 52 – california state route 56 – california state route 57 – california state route 67 – california state route 75 – california state route 76 – california state route 78 – california state route 94 – capitol loop – capon lake whipple truss bridge – chelsea bridge – chickasaw turnpike – clackline bridge – cogan house covered bridge – coventry ring road – creek turnpike – don valley parkway – federal bridge gross weight formula – ford piquette avenue plant – forksville covered bridge – forrest highway – galton bridge – great eastern highway – h-58 (michigan county highway) – hillsgrove covered bridge – interstate 8 – interstate 15 in arizona – interstate 40 in tennessee – interstate 68 – interstate 69 in michigan – interstate 70 in colorado – interstate 70 in utah – interstate 70 in west virginia – interstate 75 in michigan – interstate 80 business (west wendover, nevada–wendover, utah) – interstate 80 in iowa – interstate 82 – interstate 90 – interstate 94 in michigan – interstate 96 – interstate 182 – interstate 196 – interstate 205 (oregon–washington) – interstate 275 (michigan) – interstate 296 – interstate 355 – interstate 470 (ohio–west virginia) – interstate 496 – interstate 675 (michigan) – interstate 696 – interstate 805 – kansas turnpike – kwinana freeway – m-1 (michigan highway) – m-6 (michigan highway) – m-28 business (ishpeming–negaunee, michigan) – m-28 (michigan highway) – m-35 (michigan highway) – m-185 (michigan highway) – m-553 (michigan highway) – maryland route 36 – michigan state trunkline highway system – monnow bridge – new york state route 22 – new york state route 28 – new york state route 28n – new york state route 32 – new york state route 174 – new york state route 175 – new york state route 308 – new york state route 311 – new york state route 319 – new york state route 373 – nicoll highway collapse – o-bahn busway – old exe bridge – ontario highway 61 – ontario highway 71 – ontario highway 401 – ontario highway 402 – ontario highway 403 – ontario highway 416 – ontario highway 420 – plunketts creek bridge no. 3 – pulaski skyway – queen elizabeth way – richmond bridge, london – ridge route – sonestown covered bridge – state route 74 (new york–vermont) – state route 343 (new york−connecticut) – sweet track – u.s. route 2 in michigan – u.s. route 8 – u.s. route 16 in michigan – u.s. route 23 in michigan – u.s. route 25 in michigan – u.s. route 30 in iowa – u.s. route 31 in michigan – u.s. route 34 in iowa – u.s. route 40 alternate (keysers ridge–cumberland, maryland) – u.s. route 41 business (marquette, michigan) – u.s. route 41 in michigan – u.s. route 45 in michigan – u.s. route 50 in nevada – u.s. route 101 – u.s. route 113 – u.s. route 131 – u.s. route 141 – u.s. route 491 – utah state route 128 – vauxhall bridge – wandsworth bridge – washington state route 520 – washington state route 522 (120 articles) aston martin db9 – aston martin db11 – aston martin rapide – aston martin vanquish (2012) – ferrari ff – general motors companion make program – holden commodore (ve) – lagonda taraf – sunbeam tiger – tesla model s – winter service vehicle (11 articles) sophie blanchard – lester brain – fairfax harrison – frank pick – albert stanley, 1st baron ashfield – vesna vulović (6 articles) 4x – accolade, inc. – age of empires – capcom five – crazy taxi – development of the elder scrolls iv: oblivion – development of grand theft auto v – donkey kong – fabula nova crystallis final fantasy – final fantasy – god of war (franchise) – kingdom hearts – mana (series) – namco – paper mario – persona (series) – rockstar north – rockstar san diego – sega – sonic the hedgehog – thatgamecompany – toys for bob (22 articles) 1080° snowboarding – alleyway (video game) – anachronox – aquaria (video game) – banjo-kazooie: nuts & bolts – bastion (video game) – batman: arkham asylum – batman: arkham city – the beatles: rock band – bejeweled (video game) – bioshock – bioshock 2 – bioshock 2: minerva's den – blast corps – broken sword: the shadow of the templars – buffy the vampire slayer: wrath of the darkhul king – burning rangers – call of duty: modern warfare remastered – castlevania: aria of sorrow – castlevania: dawn of sorrow – cave story – children of mana – chrono trigger – cloud (video game) – colossal cave adventure – commander keen in invasion of the vorticons – computer space – conan (2007 video game) – crackdown (video game) – crush (video game) – the dark pictures anthology: house of ashes – daytona usa – deathrow (video game) – devil may cry (video game) – defense of the ancients – dishonored – donkey kong 64 – donkey kong country – donkey kong land – doom (1993 video game) – doom (2016 video game) – drakengard (video game) – drowned god – dungeon siege – the elder scrolls iii: morrowind – the elder scrolls iv: oblivion – empires: dawn of the modern world – f-zero gx – fallout (video game) – fallout 4: far harbor – fez (video game) – final fantasy tactics – final fantasy type-0 – final fantasy vi – final fantasy vii – final fantasy viii – final fantasy ix – final fantasy x – final fantasy x-2 – final fantasy xi – final fantasy xii – final fantasy xiii – final fantasy xiii-2 – five nights at freddy's (video game) – five nights at freddy's: help wanted – flight unlimited – flight unlimited ii – flight unlimited iii – flotilla (video game) – flow (video game) – flower (video game) – freedom planet – giants: citizen kabuto – god of war (2005 video game) – god of war ii – god of war iii – god of war: ascension – god of war: betrayal – god of war: chains of olympus – god of war: ghost of sparta – golden sun (video game) – grand theft auto v – gravity bone – grim fandango – guitar hero (video game) – half-life 2: episode one – half-life 2: lost coast – halo: combat evolved anniversary – halo 2 – halo 3 – halo 3: odst – halo: reach – halo wars – homeworld – hotline miami 2: wrong number – ico – infinity blade – iridion 3d – islanders (video game) – islands: non-places – journey (2012 video game) – jumping flash! – katamari damacy – katana zero – killer instinct gold – killer7 – kingdom hearts (video game) – kingdom hearts: chain of memories – kingdom hearts ii – kingdom two crowns – knight lore – knuckles' chaotix – the last of us – league of legends – legacy of kain: soul reaver – the legend of dragoon – the legend of zelda: link's awakening – the legend of zelda: majora's mask – the legend of zelda: ocarina of time – the legend of zelda: oracle of seasons and oracle of ages – lego indiana jones: the original adventures – lego star wars ii: the original trilogy – limbo (video game) – the longing – the lord of the rings: the battle for middle-earth ii – lost luggage (video game) – maniac mansion – marble madness – mario & sonic at the olympic games – mario party ds – mario party: the top 100 – mario power tennis – mass effect 2 – metroid prime – metroid prime 2: echoes – metroid prime 3: corruption – midtown madness – mischief makers – monaco: what's yours is mine – myst – myst iii: exile – myst iv: revelation – myst v: end of ages – new super mario bros. – nights into dreams – nights: journey of dreams – ninja gaiden (nes video game) – ōkami – oneshot – outer wilds – oxenfree – panzer dragoon saga – paper mario: color splash – paper mario: the origami king – pathways into darkness – perfect dark – phantasmagoria (video game) – pirates of the caribbean: armada of the damned – planescape: torment – plants vs. zombies (video game) – pokémon channel – populous: the beginning – portal (video game) – proteus (video game) – radical dreamers – rare replay – resident evil 2 – resident evil 5 – riven – sabre wulf – sacrifice (video game) – sam & max: freelance police – secret of mana – shadow of the colossus – shadow the hedgehog (video game) – shovel knight showdown – silent hill 4: the room – the simpsons game – the simpsons: hit & run – sinistar: unleashed – smash hit – sonic adventure – sonic after the sequel – sonic the hedgehog (2006 video game) – sonic the hedgehog 2 – sonic spinball – sonic x-treme – south park: the stick of truth – space invaders – spacewar! – spider-man (2018 video game) – spyro: year of the dragon – star control 3 – starcraft: ghost – star wars episode i: battle for naboo – star wars: rogue squadron – the suicide of rachel foster – super columbine massacre rpg! – super mario 64 – super mario all-stars – super mario bros.: the lost levels – super mario galaxy – super mario world – super meat boy – super smash bros. brawl – super smash bros. melee – system shock – system shock 2 – tales of monkey island – tatsunoko vs. capcom: ultimate all-stars – teardown (video game) – terra nova: strike force centauri – thief ii – thirty flights of loving – tony hawk's underground – trials of mana – tunic (video game) – turok: dinosaur hunter – ultima underworld: the stygian abyss – untitled goose game – uru: ages beyond myst – vagrant story – vampire: the masquerade – bloodlines – vampire: the masquerade – redemption – wii sports – wipeout 3 – wipeout 2048 – wolfenstein 3d – the world ends with you – zero escape: virtue's last reward – zork (231 articles) 32x – magnavox odyssey – master system – menacer – nintendo dsi – playstation (console) – sega cd – sega genesis – sega saturn – wii (10 articles) arbiter ( halo ) – characters of final fantasy viii – flood ( halo ) – lightning ( final fantasy ) – master chief ( halo ) – kim kitsuragi – missingno. – raichu – chris redfield – claire redfield – tidus – ur-quan – jill valentine – ethan winters – ada wong (15 articles) air board (australia) – allied logistics in the southern france campaign – american logistics in the normandy campaign – american logistics in the northern france campaign – american logistics in the western allied invasion of germany – american services and supply in the siegfried line campaign – american transportation in the siegfried line campaign – arch of remembrance – blockhaus d'éperlecques – british logistics in the normandy campaign – british logistics in the siegfried line campaign – british logistics in the western allied invasion of germany – british nuclear weapons and the falklands war – canadian national vimy memorial – the cenotaph – civil service rifles war memorial – coalhouse fort – commissioner government – devon county war memorial – duckport canal – foreign volunteers in the rhodesian security forces – fort concho – fort dobbs (north carolina) – fort southerland – fort ticonderoga – fort yellowstone – fortress of mimoyecques – grant's canal – great western railway war memorial – hanford engineer works – hove war memorial – if day – interfet logistics – la coupole – lancashire fusiliers war memorial – london and north western railway war memorial – manchester cenotaph – maud committee – mells war memorial – midland railway war memorial – midshipman – the motherland calls – northampton war memorial – north eastern railway war memorial – norwich war memorial – portsmouth war memorial – operation matterhorn logistics – rochdale cenotaph – royal artillery memorial – royal naval division war memorial – south american dreadnought race – southampton cenotaph – southend-on-sea war memorial – spalding war memorial – temporary gentlemen – tower hill memorial – united states war plans (1945–1950) – " we can do it! " – york city war memorial (59 articles) ai mark iv radar – akutan zero – amx-30 – amx-30e – boeing c-17 globemaster iii in australian service – boeing ch-47 chinook in australian service – cannon – hawker hurricane in yugoslav service – helicopter 66 – hemmema – horses in world war i – iff mark ii – leopard 2e – lince (tank) – lockheed c-130 hercules in australian service – m113 armoured personnel carriers in australian service – m249 light machine gun – mark xiv bomb sight – mcdonnell douglas a-4g skyhawk – mcdonnell douglas av-8b harrier ii – mcdonnell douglas f/a-18 hornet in australian service – mcdonnell douglas f-4 phantom ii – mcdonnell douglas f-4 phantom ii in australian service – mcdonnell douglas phantom in uk service – mcdonnell xf-85 goblin – mk vii tetrarch light tank – montreal laboratory – nike-x – northrop yf-23 – panzer i – project waler – project y – radar, gun laying, mk. i and mk. ii – rheinmetall rh-120 – rogožarski ik-3 – seri rambai – silverplate – sm u-66 – tanks in the spanish army – tanque argentino mediano – verdeja – vultee vengeance in australian service (42 articles) 250t-class torpedo boat – ahs centaur – alaska -class cruiser – almirante latorre -class battleship – albona -class minelayer – amagi -class battlecruiser – andrea doria -class battleship – ara moreno – ara rivadavia – battleship – bayern -class battleship – beograd -class destroyer – borodino -class battlecruiser – brandenburg -class battleship – braunschweig -class battleship – brazilian battleship minas geraes – brazilian battleship são paulo – brazilian cruiser bahia – chilean battleship almirante latorre – chilean cruiser esmeralda (1883) – conte di cavour -class battleship – courageous -class aircraft carrier – courageous -class battlecruiser – css baltic – css general earl van dorn – derfflinger -class battlecruiser – design 1047 battlecruiser – design a-150 battleship – deutschland -class battleship – dreadnought – dutch 1913 battleship proposal – ersatz yorck -class battlecruiser – francesco caracciolo -class battleship – french battleship bouvet – french battleship brennus – french battleship bretagne – french battleship courbet (1911) – french battleship france – french battleship gaulois – french battleship iéna – french battleship jauréguiberry – french battleship jean bart (1911) – french battleship suffren – fuji -class battleship – fusō -class battleship – galeb -class minelayer – german battleship bismarck – german battleship tirpitz – german destroyer z39 – german torpedo boat albatros – greek battleship salamis – helgoland -class battleship – hmas australia (1911) – hms agincourt (1913) – hms aigle (1801) – hms alceste (1806) – hms argus (i49) – hms ark royal (91) – hms beaulieu – hms bellerophon (1786) – hms bulwark (1899) – hms calliope (1884) – hms cardiff (d108) – hms collingwood (1908) – hms courageous (50) – hms eagle (1918) – hms emerald (1795) – hms endeavour – hms erin – hms formidable (67) – hms furious (47) – hms hermes (95) – hms hood – hms illustrious (87) – hms indefatigable (1909) – hms indefatigable (r10) – hms levant (1758) – hms lion (1910) – hmas melbourne (r21) – hms nairana (1917) – hms neptune (1909) – hms new zealand (1911) – hms pearl (1762) – hms princess royal (1911) – hms queen mary – hms ramillies (07) – hms roebuck (1774) – hms royal oak (08) – hms speedy (1782) – hms st vincent (1908) – hms temeraire (1798) – hms tiger (1913) – hms vanguard (1909) – hms vanguard (23) – hms warrior (1860) – indiana -class battleship – ins vikrant (1961) – jadran (training ship) – japanese aircraft carrier akagi – japanese aircraft carrier hiryū – japanese aircraft carrier hiyō – japanese aircraft carrier hōshō – japanese aircraft carrier jun'yō – japanese aircraft carrier kaga – japanese aircraft carrier ryūjō – japanese aircraft carrier shinano – japanese battleship asahi – japanese battleship fusō – japanese battleship haruna – japanese battleship hyūga – japanese battleship ise – japanese battleship musashi – japanese battleship mutsu – japanese battleship nagato – japanese aircraft carrier sōryū – japanese battleship tosa – japanese battleship yamato – japanese battleship yamashiro – japanese battleship yashima – kaiman -class torpedo boat – kaiser -class battleship – kaiser friedrich iii -class battleship – könig -class battleship – l 20e α-class battleship – liberté -class battleship – lion -class battlecruiser – lion -class battleship – lyon -class battleship – mackensen -class battlecruiser – mahan -class destroyer – minas geraes -class battleship – moltke -class battlecruiser – montana -class battleship – nagato -class battleship – nassau -class battleship – normandie -class battleship – north carolina -class battleship – pennsylvania -class battleship – peresvet -class battleship – petropavlovsk -class battleship – république -class battleship – rivadavia -class battleship – russian battleship dvenadsat apostolov – russian battleship oslyabya – russian battleship poltava (1894) – russian battleship peresvet – russian battleship petropavlovsk (1894) – russian battleship pobeda – russian battleship potemkin – russian battleship retvizan – russian battleship rostislav – russian battleship sevastopol (1895) – russian battleship slava – schichau -class torpedo boat – shōkaku -class aircraft carrier – sms baden – sms bayern (1915) – sms blücher – sms brandenburg – sms braunschweig – sms derfflinger – sms deutschland (1904) – sms dresden (1907) – sms elsass – sms emden – sms erzherzog franz ferdinand – sms friedrich carl – sms friedrich der grosse (1911) – sms gneisenau – sms goeben – sms grosser kurfürst (1913) – sms hannover – sms helgoland (1909) – sms hessen – sms hindenburg – hrabri -class submarine – sms kaiser – sms kaiser barbarossa – sms kaiser friedrich iii – sms kaiser karl der grosse – sms kaiser wilhelm ii – sms kaiser wilhelm der grosse – sms kaiserin – uss kearsarge (bb-5) – sms könig – sms könig albert – sms königsberg (1905) – sms körös – sms kronprinz (1914) – sms kurfürst friedrich wilhelm – sms lothringen – sms lützow – sms markgraf – sms mecklenburg – sms moltke – sms nassau – sms niobe – sms nymphe – uss oberrender – sms oldenburg – sms ostfriesland – sms pommern – sms posen – sms preussen (1903) – sms preussischer adler – sms prinz adalbert (1901) – sms prinzregent luitpold – sms rheinland – sms roon – sms scharnhorst – sms schlesien – sms schleswig-holstein – sms schwaben – sms seydlitz – sms thüringen – sms von der tann – sms weissenburg – sms westfalen – sms wettin – sms wittelsbach – sms wörth – sms zähringen – south carolina -class battleship – sovetsky soyuz -class battleship – soviet destroyer nezamozhnik – spanish battleship alfonso xiii – st vincent -class battleship – tosa -class battleship – u-1 -class submarine (austria-hungary) – uskok-class torpedo boat – uss arizona – uss chesapeake (1799) – uss connecticut (bb-18) – uss congress (1799) – uss constitution – uss illinois (bb-65) – uss indiana (bb-1) – uss iowa (bb-61) – uss lexington (cv2) – uss marmora (1862) – uss massachusetts (bb-2) – uss missouri (bb-63) – uss new ironsides – uss new jersey (bb-62) – uss nevada (bb-36) – uss orizaba – uss president – uss princess matoika – uss saratoga (cv-3) – uss siboney (id-2999) – uss west bridge – wittelsbach -class battleship – yamato -class battleship – yugoslav destroyer beograd – yugoslav destroyer dubrovnik – yugoslav destroyer ljubljana – yugoslav destroyer zagreb – yugoslav gunboat beli orao – yugoslav minelayer zmaj – yugoslav monitor drava – yugoslav monitor sava – yugoslav monitor vardar – yugoslav submarine hrabri – yugoslav submarine mališan – yugoslav submarine nebojša – yugoslav torpedo boat t1 – yugoslav torpedo boat t2 – yugoslav torpedo boat t3 – yugoslav torpedo boat t4 – yugoslav torpedo boat t5 – yugoslav torpedo boat t6 – yugoslav torpedo boat t7 (272 articles) 1st cavalry division (kingdom of yugoslavia) – 1st missouri field battery – 1st provisional marine brigade – 2nd infantry division (united kingdom) – 2nd red banner army – 4th army (kingdom of yugoslavia) – 4th missouri infantry regiment (confederate) – 4th pennsylvania infantry regiment – 6th massachusetts militia regiment – 7th army (kingdom of yugoslavia) – 8th missouri infantry regiment (confederate) – 13th airborne division (united states) – 13th missouri cavalry regiment (confederate) – 13th waffen mountain division of the ss handschar (1st croatian) – 15th tank corps – 18th infantry division (united kingdom) – 21st massachusetts infantry regiment – 22nd massachusetts infantry regiment – 21st waffen mountain division of the ss skanderbeg – 23rd (northumbrian) division – 23rd waffen mountain division of the ss kama (2nd croatian) – 24th waffen mountain division of the ss karstjäger – 27th infantry division savska – 38th (welsh) infantry division – 55th (west lancashire) infantry division – 59th (staffordshire) infantry division – 68th new york infantry regiment – 70th infantry division (united kingdom) – 509th composite group – 766th independent infantry regiment (north korea) – armed forces special weapons project – army of sambre and meuse – australian air corps – australian defence force – byzantine navy – divisional cavalry regiment (new zealand) – eastern area command (raaf) – gloucestershire regiment – history of the office of the inspector general of the united states army – landis's missouri battery – maryland and virginia rifle regiment – nichols's missouri cavalry regiment – no. 1 aircraft depot raaf – no. 1 flying training school raaf – no. 1 wing raaf – no. 2 operational conversion unit raaf – no. 1 squadron raaf – no. 33 squadron raaf – no. 34 squadron raaf – no. 36 squadron raaf – no. 37 squadron raaf – no. 38 squadron raaf – no. 77 squadron raaf – no. 79 squadron raaf – no. 90 wing raaf – no. 91 wing raaf – no. 450 squadron raaf – north-eastern area command – north-western area command – raaf area commands – raf northolt – raf uxbridge – royal gloucestershire hussars – second australian imperial force in the united kingdom – slayback's missouri cavalry regiment – territorial force – timor-leste defence force – waves – western area command (raaf) – yeomanry cavalry (70 articles) 1678 kediri campaign – 1940 brocklesby mid-air collision – 1968 thule air base b-52 crash – 1982 british army gazelle friendly fire incident – 1984 rajneeshee bioterror attack – 1994 black hawk shootdown incident – 2007 united states air force nuclear weapons incident – abbasid invasion of asia minor (806) – action of 1 august 1801 – action of 1 january 1800 – action of 13 january 1797 – actions along the matanikau – admiralty islands campaign – air rhodesia flight 825 – alsos mission – anglo-scottish war (1650–1652) – anglo-zanzibar war – air raids on japan – allied logistics in the kokoda track campaign – allied naval bombardments of japan during world war ii – anbar campaign (2003–2011) – attack on sydney harbour – australia in world war ii – australian contribution to the battle of normandy – axis naval activity in australian waters – battle for henderson field – battle of adys – battle of agua dulce – battle of albuera – battle of arawe – battle of arras (1917) – battle of auberoche – battle of azaz (1030) – battle of babylon hill – battle of the bagradas river (240 bc) – battle of the bagradas river (255 bc) – battle of bardia – battle of barnet – battle of barrosa – battle of bergerac – battle of bicocca – battle of big black river bridge – battle of the bismarck sea – battle of blanchetaque – battle of blenheim – battle of bosworth field – battle of bronkhorstspruit – battle of byram's ford – battle of caen (1346) – battle of caishi – battle of calais – battle of cane hill – battle of cape ecnomus – battle of cape esperance – battle of concepción – battle of corydon – battle of crécy – battle of the defile – battle of drepana – battle of dunbar (1650) – battle of dupplin moor – battle of dürenstein – battle of dyrrhachium (1081) – battle of edson's ridge – battle of glasgow, missouri – battle of goliad – battle of gonzales – battle of goodenough island – battle of grand gulf – battle of grand port – battle of the great plains – battle of groix – battle of halidon hill – battle of halmyros – battle of hastings – battle of helena – battle of heraklion – battle of hochkirch – battle of inverkeithing – battle of kaiapit – battle of kalavrye – battle of khafji – battle of köse dağ – battle of kunersdorf – battle of labuan – battle of lagos – battle of lake providence – battle of lake trasimene – battle of lalakaon – battle of leuthen – battle of lipantitlán – battle of lissa (1811) – battle of little blue river – battle of malvern hill – battle of marais des cygnes – battle of marshall's elm – battle of midway – battle of milne bay – battle of morlaix – battle of morotai – battle of musa qala – battle of mount austen, the galloping horse, and the sea horse – battle of neville's cross – battle of new carthage – battle of öland – battle of oroscopa – battle of osan – battle of panormus – battle of plum point bend – battle of poison spring – battle of poitiers – battle of pontvallain – battle of powick bridge – battle of preston (1648) – battle of prokhorovka – battle of pulo aura – battle of quebec (1775) – battle of radzymin (1920) – battle of ramillies – battle of raymond – battle of red cliffs – battle of rennell island – battle of rethymno – battle of rossbach – battle of saint-malo – battle of saipan – battle of san patricio – battle of saseno – battle of savo island – battle of schliengen – battle of settepozzi – battle of sio – battle of sluys – battle of st. charles – battle of taejon – battle of tassafaronga – battle of tinian – battle of the aegates – battle of the alamo – battle of the cedars – battle of the coral sea – battle of the eastern solomons – battle of the gebora – battle of the nile – battle of the santa cruz islands – battle of the saw – battle of the tenaru – battle of the trebia – battle of ticinus – battle of ticonderoga (1759) – battle of tippecanoe – battle of tory island – battle of towton – battle of trapani – battle of tulagi and gavutu–tanambogo – battle of utica (203 bc) – battle of valcour island – battle of verrières ridge – battle of villers-bocage – battle of vimy ridge – battle of vrbanja bridge – battle of vukovar – battle of warsaw (1705) – battle of winterthur – battle of winwick – battle of zama – black friday (1945) – black prince's chevauchée of 1355 – black prince's chevauchée of 1356 – bombing of obersalzberg – bombing of singapore (1944–1945) – bombing of tokyo (10 march 1945) – bombing of yawata (june 1944) – boshin war – bougainville counterattack – british logistics in the falklands war – british military intervention in the sierra leone civil war – british nuclear tests at maralinga – burnt candlemas – byzantine civil war of 1341–1347 – capture of fort ticonderoga – capture of sedalia – capture of wakefield – carlson's patrol – caspian expeditions of the rus' – chaplain–medic massacre – cologne war – convoy gp55 – crawford expedition – crécy campaign – d-day naval deceptions – edward iii's breton campaign – falaise pocket – fall of kampala – fatimid conquest of egypt – first battle of dernancourt – first battle of newtonia – first punic war – first silesian war – gascon campaign of 1345 – german bombing of belgrade – german invasion of greece – german–yugoslav partisan negotiations – glorious first of june – grass fight – guadalcanal campaign – gudovac massacre – hamilcar's victory with naravas – hill 303 massacre – the holocaust in slovakia – huế chemical attacks – hundred years' war, 1345–1347 – hungarian occupation of yugoslav territories – initial campaign of the breton civil war – invasion of tulagi (may 1942) – italian war of 1521–1526 – italian war of 1542–1546 – jin–song wars – koli point action – kragujevac massacre – krulak–mendenhall mission – lancaster's chevauchée of 1346 – lancaster's normandy chevauchée of 1356 – landing at nadzab – siegfried lederer's escape from auschwitz – lochry's defeat – douglas macarthur's escape from the philippines – matanikau offensive – may revolution – mercenary war – morotai mutiny – naval battle of guadalcanal – operation berlin (atlantic) – operation brevity – operation camargue – operation catechism – operation charnwood – operation cobra – operation copperhead – operation crossroads – operation epsom – operation flavius – operation goodwood (naval) – operation grandslam – operation hardboiled – operation hurricane – operation infinite reach – operation inmate – operation ironside – operation ke – operation kikusui i – operation kita – operation mascot – operation mincemeat – operation obviate – operation pamphlet – operation paravane – operation perch – operation sportpalast – operation teardrop – operation title – operation tractable – operation uranus – operation varsity – pontiac's war – port chicago disaster – raid at cabanatuan – razing of friesoythe – relief of douglas macarthur – rhine campaign of 1796 – roman withdrawal from africa (255 bc) – russian occupations of beirut – rwandan civil war – sack of amorium – second battle of cape finisterre – second battle of independence – second battle of newtonia – second fitna – second ostend raid – second punic war – second silesian war – second war of scottish independence – siege of aiguillon – siege of baghdad – siege of berwick (1333) – siege of breteuil – siege of bukhara – siege of calais (1346–1347) – siege of constantinople (674–678) – siege of constantinople (717–718) – siege of godesberg – siege of guînes (1352) – siege of lilybaeum (250–241 bc) – siege of thessalonica (1422–1430) – sieges of berwick (1355 and 1356) – sieges of taunton – silesian wars – south china sea raid – southern rhodesia in world war i – steele's greenville expedition – surrender of japan – take ichi convoy – third punic war – third silesian war – treaty of lutatius – truce of calais – uruguayan war – uss constellation vs la vengeance – uss constellation vs l'insurgente – uss iowa turret explosion – van buren raid – war of the bavarian succession – war of the fifth coalition – war of the league of cambrai – weardale campaign – western australian emergency of march 1944 – winter war – zaian war (318 articles) wilfred arthur – ibn al-ash'ath – william anderson (raaf officer) – ba cụt – peter badcoe – ivan bagramyan – thomas baker (aviator) – albert ball – john balmer – nicky barr – cyril bassett – prince louis of battenberg – otto becher – mary bell (aviator) – gottlob berger – frank berryman – arthur blackburn – frank bladin – thomas blamey – john f. bolt – william bostock – juan davis bradburn – william brill – donald forrester brown – jesse l. brown – raymond brownell – frederick browning – henry burrell (admiral) – james wood bush – vannevar bush – scott carpenter – roger b. chaffee – harry chauvel – john bullock clark – dudley clarke – harry cobby – adrian cole (raaf officer) – dick cresswell – thomas crisp – george b. crittenden – andrew cunningham, 1st viscount cunningham of hyndhope – luís alves de lima e silva, duke of caxias – roderic dallas – richard dannatt – phillip davey – george andrew davis jr. – tom derrick – hermann detzner – theodore komnenos doukas – roy dowling – rupert downes – uroš drenović – peter drummond (raf officer) – vance drummond – momčilo đujić – pavle đurišić – tom eastick – brian eaton – charles eaton (raaf officer) – thomas erpingham – david evans (raaf officer) – neil hamilton fairley – karl aloys zu fürstenberg – ragnar garrett – bobby gibbes – john glenn – stanley goble – george gosse – ulysses s. grant – charles green (australian soldier) – leslie groves – james p. hagerstrom – valston hancock – winfield scott hancock – colin hannah – william hardham – donald hardman – thomas hardy (royal navy officer, died 1732) – eric harrison (raaf officer) – francis harvey – frank headlam – charles heaphy – william hely – edmund herring – joe hewitt (raaf officer) – peter heywood – henry de hinuber – james hogun – les holden – brian horrocks – robert howe (continental army officer) – cedric howell – thomas j. hudner jr. – paterson clarence hughes – caesar hull – joaquim josé inácio, viscount of inhaúma – roy inwood – hastings ismay, 1st baron ismay – benjamin jackson (sailor) – john francis jackson – mike jackson (british army officer) – peter jeffrey (raaf officer) – jørgen jensen (soldier) – dobroslav jevđević – george jones (raaf officer) – edgar kain – j. r. kealoha – hasan al-kharrat – bill kibby – elwyn roy king – bruce kingsbury – thomas c. kinkaid – tadeusz kościuszko – walter krueger – gilbert du motier, marquis de lafayette – william d. leahy – john leak – raymond leane – lê quang tung – helmut lent – john lerew – ernst lindemann – carl hans lody – james longstreet – henry macandrew – douglas macarthur – iven mackay – bill madden (soldier) – nestor makhno – garnet malley – haane manahi – manuel marques de sousa, count of porto alegre – lionel matthews – murray maxwell – bill mccann – john mccauley – james whiteside mccay – ian dougald mclachlan – lesley j. mcnair – frank mcnamara (raaf officer) – alan mcnicoll – august meyszner – john minsterworth – james moore (continental army officer) – fred moosally – emanuel moravec – douglas albert munro – alister murdoch – audie murphy – harry murray – thomas neville (died 1460) – james newland – bill newton – robert nimmo – lisa nowak – dorothy olsen – radoje pajović – william sterling parsons – george s. patton – kosta pećanac – walter peeler – jerry pentland – henry petre – milorad petrović – roy phillipps – artur phleps – reg pollard (general) – phạm ngọc thảo – henry hoʻolulu pitman – john plagis – lazare ponticelli – arthur w. radford – peter raw – alan rawlinson – charles richardson (royal navy officer) – prince romerson – james rowland (raaf officer) – william edward sanders – reg saunders – stanley savige – frederick scherger – uriel sebree – friedrich wilhelm von seydlitz – kenneth r. shadrick – alan shepard – alfred shout – william y. slack – military career of ian smith – issy smith – oerip soemohardjo – lou spence – myles standish – gordon steege – clare stevenson – ronald stuart – vernon sturdee – maurice suckling – sudirman – arthur sullivan (australian soldier) – jethro sumner – adamson tannehill – paul nobuo tatsuguchi – paul tibbets – tôn thất đính – edgar towner – johann von klenau – ellis wackett – john lloyd waddy – kenneth walker (general) – hector waller – allan walters – fabian ware – blair wark – oswald watt – lawrence weathers – stanley price weir – henry wells (general) – john whittle – maurice wilder-neligan – richard williams (raaf officer) – john wilton (general) – james park woods – henry wrigley (223 articles) a list of articles needing cleanup associated with this project is available. see also the tool's wiki page and the index of wikiprojects .

featured articles (fas) are some of the best articles in the english wikipedia. they are written by volunteers about subjects of their own choosing, and evaluated by other volunteers against the featured article criteria . designated volunteers select the fa to become today's featured article on wikipedia's main page .

george_frazier_miller.png (290 × 356 pixels, file size: 123 kb, mime type: image/png ) click on a date/time to view the file as it appeared at that time. more than 100 pages use this file. the following list shows the first 100 pages that use this file only. a full list is available. this file contains additional information, probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. if the file has been modified from its original state, some details may not fully reflect the modified file.

george frazier miller (november 28, 1864 – may 9, 1943) was an american religious official and activist. a member of the episcopal church , he served as a rector for 47 years and was a founding member of the niagara movement . born in aiken, south carolina , when miller was six his father died and his grandfather, richard edward dereef , helped raise him. educated at howard university , general theological seminary , and new york university , he was ordained in the episcopal church in 1891 and became a rector in 1896. miller was a friend of w. e. b. du bois and was among the founders of the niagara movement in 1906. he was a socialist candidate for united states house of representatives in 1918 . he was a member of two delegations to president woodrow wilson , one requesting that lynching become a federal crime and the other requesting that clemency be given to members of the 24th infantry regiment in relation to the houston riot of 1917 . george frazier miller was born in aiken, south carolina , on november 28, 1864, as the youngest of six children. when miller was six his father died and he was raised by his mother and grandfather, richard edward dereef . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] miller fathered three children [ 3 ] with ellen bulkley miller, who died on october 15, 1923. [ 4 ] miller graduated from howard university with a bachelor of arts degree in 1888, general theological seminary in 1891, and new york university . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] on may 24, 1891, miller was ordained in the episcopal church . [ 5 ] in 1912, howard university gave him an honorary degree of doctor of divinity . [ 6 ] starting in 1896, miller served as the rector of st. augustine's church in brooklyn , new york city , until his death. [ 2 ] in 1924, he was responsible for obtaining the church's new building. [ 7 ] he became a senior clergyman in the episcopal diocese of long island and a trustee of howard university. [ 8 ] miller was elected president of the national equal rights league . [ 2 ] on august 1, 1917, miller was a member of a delegation of prominent black leaders that presented a petition to president woodrow wilson asking for him to support legislation to make lynching a federal crime. this delegation included everard w. daniel , james weldon johnson , john e. nail , fred r. moore , madam c. j. walker , and chaired by frederick asbury cullen . however, wilson refused to meet with them with his secretary, joseph patrick tumulty , saying that wilson was too busy. [ 9 ] cullen, johnson, and miller were members of a delegation to wilson in 1918, that presented a petition signed by 12,000 people asking for clemency for members of the 24th infantry regiment given the death sentence for the houston riot of 1917 . after this meeting wilson stopped all executions of soldiers except for those at the front in world war i and later commuted 10 of the 16 death sentences. [ 10 ] [ 11 ] miller was a friend of w. e. b. du bois , [ 2 ] a founding member of the niagara movement , [ 1 ] member of the naacp , and contributor to the messenger . [ 12 ] in 1906, miller joined the socialist party of america [ 2 ] and was its candidate for the new york's 21st congressional district in 1918 , [ 1 ] [ 13 ] during which he raised and spent $10 (equivalent to $209 in 2024). [ 14 ] he received 5.1% of the vote as incumbent democrat jerome f. donovan was re-elected. he called for the release of earl browder . [ 8 ] on may 9, 1943, miller died in brooklyn [ 8 ] [ 3 ] and was succeeded as rector by charles c.e. england. [ 15 ]

the united states congress is the legislative branch of the federal government of the united states . it is a bicameral legislature, including a lower body , the u.s. house of representatives , and an upper body , the u.s. senate . it meets in the united states capitol in washington, d.c. members of congress are chosen through direct election , [ b ] though vacancies in the senate may be filled by a governor 's appointment. congress has a total of 535 voting members, a figure which includes 100 senators and 435 representatives ; the house of representatives has 6 additional non-voting members . the vice president of the united states , as president of the senate, has a vote in the senate only when there is a tie. [ 2 ] congress convenes for a two-year term , commencing every other january. elections are held every even-numbered year on election day . the members of the house of representatives are elected for the two-year term of a congress. the reapportionment act of 1929 established that there be 435 representatives, and the uniform congressional redistricting act requires that they be elected from single-member constituencies or districts . it is also required that the congressional districts be apportioned among states by population every ten years using the u.s. census results, provided that each state has at least one congressional representative. each senator is elected at-large in their state for a six-year term, with terms staggered , so every two years approximately one-third of the senate is up for election. each state, regardless of population or size, has two senators, so currently, there are 100 senators for the 50 states. article one of the u.s. constitution requires that members of congress be at least 25 years old for the house and at least 30 years old for the u.s. senate, be a u.s. citizen for seven years for the house and nine years for the senate, and be an inhabitant of the state which they represent. members in both chambers may stand for re-election an unlimited number of times. congress was created by the u.s. constitution and first met in 1789, replacing the congress of the confederation in its legislative function. although not legally mandated, in practice members of congress since the late 18th century are typically affiliated with one of the two major parties , the democratic party or the republican party , and only rarely with a third party or independents affiliated with no party. members can also switch parties at any time, though this is uncommon. article one of the united states constitution states, "all legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a congress of the united states, which shall consist of a senate and house of representatives." the house and senate are equal partners in the legislative process – legislation cannot be enacted without the consent of both chambers. the constitution grants each chamber some unique powers. the senate ratifies treaties and approves presidential appointments while the house initiates revenue -raising bills. the house initiates and decides impeachment while the senate votes on conviction and removal of office for impeachment cases. [ 3 ] a two-thirds vote of the senate is required before an impeached person can be removed from office. [ 3 ] the term congress can also refer to a particular meeting of the legislature. a congress covers two years; the current one, the 119th congress , began on january 3, 2025, and will end on january 3, 2027. since the adoption of the twentieth amendment to the united states constitution , the congress has started and ended at noon on the third day of january of every odd-numbered year. members of the senate are referred to as senators; members of the house of representatives are referred to as representatives, congressmen, or congresswomen. scholar and representative lee h. hamilton asserted that the "historic mission of congress has been to maintain freedom" and insisted it was a "driving force in american government" [ 4 ] and a "remarkably resilient institution". [ 5 ] congress is the "heart and soul of our democracy", according to this view, even though legislators rarely achieve the prestige or name recognition of presidents or supreme court justices ; one wrote that "legislators remain ghosts in america's historical imagination." one analyst argues that it is not a solely reactive institution but has played an active role in shaping government policy and is extraordinarily sensitive to public pressure. [ 6 ] several academics described congress: congress reflects us in all our strengths and all our weaknesses. it reflects our regional idiosyncrasies, our ethnic, religious, and racial diversity, our multitude of professions, and our shadings of opinion on everything from the value of war to the war over values. congress is the government's most representative body ... congress is essentially charged with reconciling our many points of view on the great public policy issues of the day. [ 4 ] congress is constantly changing and is constantly in flux. [ 7 ] in recent times, the american south and west have gained house seats according to demographic changes recorded by the census and includes more women and minorities . [ 7 ] while power balances among the different parts of government continue to change, the internal structure of congress is important to understand along with its interactions with so-called intermediary institutions such as political parties , civic associations , interest groups , and the mass media . [ 6 ] the congress of the united states serves two distinct purposes that overlap: local representation to the federal government of a congressional district by representatives and a state's at-large representation to the federal government by senators. most incumbents seek re-election, and their historical likelihood of winning subsequent elections exceeds 90 percent. [ 8 ] the historical records of the house of representatives and the senate are maintained by the center for legislative archives, which is a part of the national archives and records administration . [ 9 ] congress is directly responsible for the governing of the district of columbia , the current seat of the federal government. the first continental congress was a gathering of representatives from twelve of the thirteen colonies . [ 10 ] on july 4, 1776, the second continental congress adopted the declaration of independence , referring to the new nation as the "united states of america". the articles of confederation in 1781 created the congress of the confederation , a unicameral body with equal representation among the states in which each state had a veto over most decisions. congress had executive but not legislative authority, and the federal judiciary was confined to admiralty [ 11 ] and lacked authority to collect taxes, regulate commerce, or enforce laws. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] government powerlessness led to the convention of 1787 which proposed a revised constitution with a two-chamber or bicameral congress. [ 14 ] smaller states argued for equal representation for each state. [ 15 ] the two-chamber structure had functioned well in state governments. [ 16 ] a compromise plan, the connecticut compromise , was adopted with representatives chosen by population (benefiting larger states) and exactly two senators chosen by state governments (benefiting smaller states). [ 7 ] [ 17 ] the ratified constitution created a federal structure with two overlapping power centers so that each citizen as an individual is subject to the powers of state government and national government. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] to protect against abuse of power, each branch of government – executive, legislative, and judicial – had a separate sphere of authority and could check other branches according to the principle of the separation of powers . [ 3 ] furthermore, there were checks and balances within the legislature since there were two separate chambers. [ 21 ] the new government became active in 1789. [ 3 ] [ 22 ] political scientist julian e. zelizer suggested there were four main congressional eras, with considerable overlap, and included the formative era (1780s–1820s), the partisan era (1830s–1900s), the committee era (1910s–1960s), and the contemporary era (1970–present). [ 23 ] federalists and anti-federalists jostled for power in the early years as political parties became pronounced. with the passage of the constitution and the bill of rights , the anti-federalist movement was exhausted. some activists joined the anti-administration party that james madison and thomas jefferson were forming about 1790–1791 to oppose policies of treasury secretary alexander hamilton ; it soon became the democratic-republican party or the jeffersonian republican party [ 24 ] and began the era of the first party system . in 1800, thomas jefferson 's election to the presidency marked a peaceful transition of power between the parties. john marshall , 4th chief justice of the supreme court , empowered the courts by establishing the principle of judicial review in law in the landmark case marbury v. madison in 1803, effectively giving the supreme court a power to nullify congressional legislation. [ 25 ] [ 26 ] the civil war , which lasted from 1861 to 1865, resolved the slavery issue and unified the nation under federal authority but weakened the power of states' rights . the gilded age (1877–1901) was marked by republican dominance of congress. during this time, lobbying activity became more intense, particularly during the administration of president ulysses s. grant in which influential lobbies advocated for railroad subsidies and tariffs on wool. [ 27 ] immigration and high birth rates swelled the ranks of citizens and the nation grew at a rapid pace. the progressive era was characterized by strong party leadership in both houses of congress and calls for reform; sometimes reformers said lobbyists corrupted politics. [ 28 ] the position of speaker of the house became extremely powerful under leaders such as thomas reed in 1890 and joseph gurney cannon . by the beginning of the 20th century, party structures and leadership emerged as key organizers of senate proceedings. [ 30 ] a system of seniority, in which long-time members of congress gained more and more power, encouraged politicians of both parties to seek long terms. committee chairmen remained influential in both houses until the reforms of the 1970s. [ 31 ] important structural changes included the direct popular election of senators according to the seventeenth amendment , [ 17 ] ratified on april 8, 1913. supreme court decisions based on the constitution's commerce clause expanded congressional power to regulate the economy. [ 32 ] one effect of popular election of senators was to reduce the difference between the house and senate in terms of their link to the electorate. [ 33 ] lame duck reforms according to the twentieth amendment reduced the power of defeated and retiring members of congress to wield influence despite their lack of accountability. [ 34 ] the great depression ushered in president franklin roosevelt and strong control by democrats [ 35 ] and historic new deal policies. roosevelt 's election in 1932 marked a shift in government power towards the executive branch. numerous new deal initiatives came from the white house rather initiated by congress. [ 36 ] president roosevelt pushed his agenda in congress by detailing executive branch staff to friendly senate committees (a practice that ended with the legislative reorganization act of 1946). [ 37 ] the democratic party controlled both houses of congress for many years. [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] during this time, republicans and conservative southern democrats [ 41 ] formed the conservative coalition . [ 40 ] [ 42 ] democrats maintained control of congress during world war ii . [ 43 ] [ 44 ] congress struggled with efficiency in the postwar era partly by reducing the number of standing congressional committees. [ 45 ] southern democrats became a powerful force in many influential committees although political power alternated between republicans and democrats during these years. more complex issues required greater specialization and expertise, such as space flight and atomic energy policy. [ 45 ] senator joseph mccarthy exploited the fear of communism during the second red scare and conducted televised hearings. [ 46 ] [ 47 ] in 1960, democratic candidate john f. kennedy narrowly won the presidency and power shifted again to the democrats who dominated both chambers of congress from 1961 to 1980, and retained a consistent majority in the house from 1955 to 1994. [ 48 ] congress enacted johnson's great society program to fight poverty and hunger. the watergate scandal had a powerful effect of waking up a somewhat dormant congress which investigated presidential wrongdoing and coverups; the scandal "substantially reshaped" relations between the branches of government, suggested political scientist bruce j. schulman . [ 49 ] partisanship returned, particularly after 1994; one analyst attributes partisan infighting to slim congressional majorities which discouraged friendly social gatherings in meeting rooms such as the board of education . [ 6 ] congress began reasserting its authority. [ 36 ] [ 50 ] lobbying became a big factor despite the 1971 federal election campaign act . political action committees or pacs could make substantive donations to congressional candidates via such means as soft money contributions. [ 51 ] while soft money funds were not given to specific campaigns for candidates, the money often benefited candidates substantially in an indirect way and helped reelect candidates. [ 51 ] reforms such as the 2002 bipartisan campaign reform act limited campaign donations but did not limit soft money contributions. [ 52 ] one source suggests post-watergate laws amended in 1974 meant to reduce the "influence of wealthy contributors and end payoffs" instead "legitimized pacs" since they "enabled individuals to band together in support of candidates". [ 53 ] from 1974 to 1984, pacs grew from 608 to 3,803 and donations leaped from $12.5 million to $120 million [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] along with concern over pac influence in congress. [ 56 ] [ 57 ] in 2009, there were 4,600 business, labor and special-interest pacs [ 58 ] including ones for lawyers , electricians , and real estate brokers . [ 59 ] from 2007 to 2008, 175 members of congress received "half or more of their campaign cash" from pacs. [ 58 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] from 1970 to 2009, the house expanded delegates, along with their powers and privileges representing u.s. citizens in non-state areas, beginning with representation on committees for puerto rico's resident commissioner in 1970. in 1971, a delegate for the district of columbia was authorized, and in 1972 new delegate positions were established for u.s. virgin islands and guam . in 1978, an additional delegate for american samoa were added. in the late 20th century, the media became more important in congress's work. [ 62 ] analyst michael schudson suggested that greater publicity undermined the power of political parties and caused "more roads to open up in congress for individual representatives to influence decisions". [ 62 ] norman ornstein suggested that media prominence led to a greater emphasis on the negative and sensational side of congress, and referred to this as the tabloidization of media coverage. [ 7 ] others saw pressure to squeeze a political position into a thirty-second soundbite. [ 63 ] a report characterized congress in 2013 as unproductive, gridlocked, and "setting records for futility". [ 64 ] in october 2013, with congress unable to compromise, the government was shut down for several weeks and risked a serious default on debt payments, causing 60% of the public to say they would "fire every member of congress" including their own representative. [ 65 ] one report suggested congress posed the "biggest risk to the u.s. economy" because of its brinksmanship , "down-to-the-wire budget and debt crises" and "indiscriminate spending cuts", resulting in slowed economic activity and keeping up to two million people unemployed. [ 66 ] there has been increasing public dissatisfaction with congress, [ 67 ] with extremely low approval ratings [ 68 ] [ 69 ] which dropped to 5% in october 2013. [ 70 ] in 2009, congress authorized another delegate for the northern mariana islands . these six members of congress enjoy floor privileges to introduce bills and resolutions, and in recent congresses they vote in permanent and select committees, in party caucuses and in joint conferences with the senate. they have capitol hill offices, staff and two annual appointments to each of the four military academies. while their votes are constitutional when congress authorizes their house committee of the whole votes, recent congresses have not allowed for that, and they cannot vote when the house is meeting as the house of representatives. [ 71 ] on january 6, 2021, congress gathered to confirm the election of joe biden, when supporters of the outgoing president donald trump attacked the building . the session of congress ended prematurely, and congress representatives evacuated. trump supporters occupied congress until d.c police evacuated the area. the event was the first time since the burning of washington by the british during the war of 1812 that the united states congress was forcefully occupied. [ 72 ] various social and structural barriers have prevented women from gaining seats in congress. in the early 20th century, women's domestic roles and the inability to vote forestalled opportunities to run for and hold public office. the two party system and the lack of term limits favored incumbent white men, making the widow's succession – in which a woman temporarily took over a seat vacated by the death of her husband – the most common path to congress for white women. [ 73 ] women candidates began making substantial inroads in the later 20th century, due in part to new political support mechanisms and public awareness of their underrepresentation in congress. [ 74 ] recruitment and financial support for women candidates were rare until the second-wave feminism movement , when activists moved into electoral politics. beginning in the 1970s, donors and political action committees like emily's list began recruiting, training and funding women candidates. watershed political moments like the confirmation of clarence thomas and the 2016 presidential election created momentum for women candidates, resulting in the year of the woman and the election of members of the squad , respectively. [ 75 ] [ 76 ] women of color faced additional challenges that made their ascension to congress even more difficult. jim crow laws , voter suppression and other forms of structural racism made it virtually impossible for women of color to reach congress prior to 1965. the passage of the voting rights act that year , and the elimination of race-based immigration laws in the 1960s opened the possibility for black, asian american, latina and other non-white women candidates to run for congress. [ 77 ] racially polarized voting, racial stereotypes and lack of institutional support still prevent women of color from reaching congress as easily as white people . senate elections, which require victories in statewide electorates, have been particularly difficult for women of color. [ 78 ] carol moseley braun became the first woman of color to reach the senate in 1993. the second, mazie hirono , won in 2013. in 2021, kamala harris became the first female president of the senate , which came with her role as the first female vice president of the united states . article one of the constitution creates and sets forth the structure and most of the powers of congress. sections one through six describe how congress is elected and gives each house the power to create its own structure. section seven lays out the process for creating laws, and section eight enumerates numerous powers. section nine is a list of powers congress does not have, and section ten enumerates powers of the state, some of which may only be granted by congress. [ 79 ] constitutional amendments have granted congress additional powers. congress also has implied powers derived from the constitution's necessary and proper clause . congress has authority over financial and budgetary policy through the enumerated power to "lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises, to pay the debts and provide for the common defence and general welfare of the united states". there is vast authority over budgets, although analyst eric patashnik suggested that much of congress's power to manage the budget has been lost when the welfare state expanded since "entitlements were institutionally detached from congress's ordinary legislative routine and rhythm." [ 80 ] another factor leading to less control over the budget was a keynesian belief that balanced budgets were unnecessary. [ 80 ] the sixteenth amendment in 1913 extended congressional power of taxation to include income taxes without apportionment among the several states, and without regard to any census or enumeration. [ 81 ] the constitution also grants congress the exclusive power to appropriate funds, and this power of the purse is one of congress's primary checks on the executive branch. [ 81 ] congress can borrow money on the credit of the united states, regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the states, and coin money. [ 82 ] generally, the senate and the house of representatives have equal legislative authority, although only the house may originate revenue and appropriation bills . [ 3 ] congress has an important role in national defense , including the exclusive power to declare war, to raise and maintain the armed forces , and to make rules for the military. [ 83 ] some critics charge that the executive branch has usurped congress's constitutionally defined task of declaring war. [ 84 ] while historically presidents initiated the process for going to war, they asked for and received formal war declarations from congress for the war of 1812 , the mexican–american war , the spanish–american war , world war i , and world war ii , [ 85 ] although president theodore roosevelt 's military move into panama in 1903 did not get congressional approval. [ 85 ] in the early days after the north korean invasion of 1950 , president truman described the american response as a "police action". [ 86 ] according to time magazine in 1970, "u.s. presidents [had] ordered troops into position or action without a formal congressional declaration a total of 149 times." [ 85 ] in 1993, michael kinsley wrote that "congress's war power has become the most flagrantly disregarded provision in the constitution," and that the "real erosion [of congress's war power] began after world war ii." [ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] disagreement about the extent of congressional versus presidential power regarding war has been present periodically throughout the nation's history. [ 90 ] congress can establish post offices and post roads, issue patents and copyrights , fix standards of weights and measures, establish courts inferior to the supreme court , and "make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this constitution in the government of the united states, or in any department or officer thereof". article four gives congress the power to admit new states into the union. one of congress's foremost non-legislative functions is the power to investigate and oversee the executive branch. [ 91 ] congressional oversight is usually delegated to committees and is facilitated by congress's subpoena power. [ 92 ] some critics have charged that congress has in some instances failed to do an adequate job of overseeing the other branches of government. in the plame affair , critics including representative henry a. waxman charged that congress was not doing an adequate job of oversight in this case. [ 93 ] there have been concerns about congressional oversight of executive actions such as warrantless wiretapping , although others respond that congress did investigate the legality of presidential decisions. [ 94 ] political scientists ornstein and mann suggested that oversight functions do not help members of congress win reelection. congress also has the exclusive power of removal , allowing impeachment and removal of the president, federal judges and other federal officers. [ 95 ] there have been charges that presidents acting under the doctrine of the unitary executive have assumed important legislative and budgetary powers that should belong to congress. [ 96 ] so-called signing statements are one way in which a president can "tip the balance of power between congress and the white house a little more in favor of the executive branch", according to one account. [ 97 ] past presidents, including ronald reagan , george h. w. bush , bill clinton , and george w. bush , [ 98 ] have made public statements when signing congressional legislation about how they understand a bill or plan to execute it, and commentators, including the american bar association , have described this practice as against the spirit of the constitution. [ 99 ] [ 100 ] there have been concerns that presidential authority to cope with financial crises is eclipsing the power of congress. [ 101 ] in 2008, george f. will called the capitol building a "tomb for the antiquated idea that the legislative branch matters". [ 102 ] the constitution enumerates the powers of congress in detail. in addition, other congressional powers have been granted, or confirmed, by constitutional amendments. the thirteenth (1865), fourteenth (1868), and fifteenth amendments (1870) gave congress authority to enact legislation to enforce rights of african americans, including voting rights , due process , and equal protection under the law. [ 103 ] generally militia forces are controlled by state governments, not congress. [ 104 ] congress also has implied powers deriving from the constitution's necessary and proper clause which permit congress to "make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this constitution in the government of the united states, or in any department or officer thereof". [ 105 ] broad interpretations of this clause and of the commerce clause , the enumerated power to regulate commerce, in rulings such as mcculloch v. maryland , have effectively widened the scope of congress's legislative authority far beyond that prescribed in section eight. [ 106 ] [ 107 ] constitutional responsibility for the oversight of washington, d.c. , the federal district and national capital, and the u.s. territories of guam , american samoa , puerto rico , the u.s. virgin islands , and the northern mariana islands rests with congress. [ 108 ] the republican form of government in territories is devolved by congressional statute to the respective territories including direct election of governors, the d.c. mayor and locally elective territorial legislatures. [ 109 ] each territory and washington, d.c., elects a non-voting delegate to the u.s. house of representatives as they have throughout congressional history. they "possess the same powers as other members of the house, except that they may not vote when the house is meeting as the house of representatives". they are assigned offices and allowances for staff, participate in debate, and appoint constituents to the four military service academies for the army, navy, air force and coast guard. [ 110 ] washington, d.c., citizens alone among u.s. territories have the right to directly vote for the president of the united states, although the democratic and republican political parties nominate their presidential candidates at national conventions which include delegates from the five major territories. [ 111 ] representative lee h. hamilton explained how congress functions within the federal government: to me the key to understanding it is balance. the founders went to great lengths to balance institutions against each other – balancing powers among the three branches: congress, the president, and the supreme court; between the house of representatives and the senate; between the federal government and the states; among states of different sizes and regions with different interests; between the powers of government and the rights of citizens, as spelled out in the bill of rights ... no one part of government dominates the other. [ 4 ] : 6 the constitution provides checks and balances among the three branches of the federal government. its authors expected the greater power to lie with congress as described in article one. [ 4 ] [ 112 ] the influence of congress on the presidency has varied from period to period depending on factors such as congressional leadership, presidential political influence, historical circumstances such as war, and individual initiative by members of congress. the impeachment of andrew johnson made the presidency less powerful than congress for a considerable period afterwards. [ 113 ] the 20th and 21st centuries have seen the rise of presidential power under politicians such as theodore roosevelt , woodrow wilson , franklin d. roosevelt , richard nixon , ronald reagan , and george w. bush . [ 114 ] congress restricted presidential power with laws such as the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 and the war powers resolution . the presidency remains considerably more powerful today than during the 19th century. [ 4 ] [ 114 ] executive branch officials are often loath to reveal sensitive information to members of congress because of concern that information could not be kept secret; in return, knowing they may be in the dark about executive branch activity, congressional officials are more likely to distrust their counterparts in executive agencies. [ 115 ] many government actions require fast coordinated effort by many agencies, and this is a task that congress is ill-suited for. congress is slow, open, divided, and not well matched to handle more rapid executive action or do a good job of overseeing such activity, according to one analysis. [ 116 ] the constitution concentrates removal powers in the congress by empowering and obligating the house of representatives to impeach executive or judicial officials for "treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors". impeachment is a formal accusation of unlawful activity by a civil officer or government official. the senate is constitutionally empowered and obligated to try all impeachments. a simple majority in the house is required to impeach an official; a two-thirds majority in the senate is required for conviction. a convicted official is automatically removed from office; in addition, the senate may stipulate that the defendant be banned from holding office in the future. impeachment proceedings may not inflict more than this. a convicted party may face criminal penalties in a normal court of law. in the history of the united states, the house of representatives has impeached sixteen officials, of whom seven were convicted. another resigned before the senate could complete the trial. only three presidents have ever been impeached: andrew johnson in 1868, bill clinton in 1999, donald trump in 2019 and 2021. the trials of johnson, clinton, and the 2019 trial of trump all ended in acquittal; in johnson's case, the senate fell one vote short of the two-thirds majority required for conviction . in 1974, richard nixon resigned from office after impeachment proceedings in the house judiciary committee indicated his removal from office. the senate has an important check on the executive power by confirming cabinet officials, judges, and other high officers "by and with the advice and consent of the senate". it confirms most presidential nominees, but rejections are not uncommon. furthermore, treaties negotiated by the president must be ratified by a two-thirds majority vote in the senate to take effect. as a result, presidential arm-twisting of senators can happen before a key vote; for example, president obama's secretary of state, hillary clinton , urged her former senate colleagues to approve a nuclear arms treaty with russia in 2010. [ 117 ] the house of representatives has no formal role in either the ratification of treaties or the appointment of federal officials, other than in filling a vacancy in the office of the vice president; in such a case, a majority vote in each house is required to confirm a president's nomination of a vice president. [ 3 ] in 1803, the supreme court established judicial review of federal legislation in marbury v. madison , holding that congress could not grant unconstitutional power to the court itself. the constitution did not explicitly state that the courts may exercise judicial review. the notion that courts could declare laws unconstitutional was envisioned by the founding fathers . alexander hamilton , for example, mentioned and expounded upon the doctrine in federalist no. 78 . originalists on the supreme court have argued that if the constitution does not say something explicitly it is unconstitutional to infer what it should, might, or could have said. [ 118 ] judicial review means that the supreme court can nullify a congressional law. it is a huge check by the courts on the legislative authority and limits congressional power substantially. in 1857, for example, the supreme court struck down provisions of a congressional act of 1820 in its dred scott decision. [ 119 ] at the same time, the supreme court can extend congressional power through its constitutional interpretations. the congressional inquiry into st. clair's defeat of 1791 was the first congressional investigation of the executive branch. [ 120 ] investigations are conducted to gather information on the need for future legislation, to test the effectiveness of laws already passed, and to inquire into the qualifications and performance of members and officials of the other branches. committees may hold hearings, and, if necessary, subpoena people to testify when investigating issues over which it has the power to legislate. [ 121 ] [ 122 ] witnesses who refuse to testify may be cited for contempt of congress , and those who testify falsely may be charged with perjury . most committee hearings are open to the public (the house and senate intelligence committees are the exception); important hearings are widely reported in the mass media and transcripts published a few months afterwards. [ 122 ] congress, in the course of studying possible laws and investigating matters, generates an incredible amount of information in various forms, and can be described as a publisher. [ 123 ] indeed, it publishes house and senate reports [ 123 ] and maintains databases which are updated irregularly with publications in a variety of electronic formats. [ 123 ] congress also plays a role in presidential elections. both houses meet in joint session on the sixth day of january following a presidential election to count the electoral votes, and there are procedures to follow if no candidate wins a majority. [ 3 ] the main result of congressional activity is the creation of laws, [ 124 ] most of which are contained in the united states code, arranged by subject matter alphabetically under fifty title headings to present the laws "in a concise and usable form". [ 3 ] congress is split into two chambers – house and senate – and manages the task of writing national legislation by dividing work into separate committees which specialize in different areas. some members of congress are elected by their peers to be officers of these committees. further, congress has ancillary organizations such as the government accountability office and the library of congress to help provide it with information, and members of congress have staff and offices to assist them as well. in addition, a vast industry of lobbyists helps members write legislation on behalf of diverse corporate and labor interests. the committee structure permits members of congress to study a particular subject intensely. it is neither expected nor possible that a member be an expert on all subject areas before congress. [ 125 ] as time goes by, members develop expertise in particular subjects and their legal aspects. committees investigate specialized subjects and advise the entire congress about choices and trade-offs. the choice of specialty may be influenced by the member's constituency, important regional issues, prior background and experience. [ 126 ] senators often choose a different specialty from that of the other senator from their state to prevent overlap. [ 127 ] some committees specialize in running the business of other committees and exert a powerful influence over all legislation; for example, the house ways and means committee has considerable influence over house affairs. [ 128 ] committees write legislation. while procedures, such as the house discharge petition process, can introduce bills to the house floor and effectively bypass committee input, they are exceedingly difficult to implement without committee action. committees have power and have been called independent fiefdoms . legislative, oversight, and internal administrative tasks are divided among about two hundred committees and subcommittees which gather information, evaluate alternatives, and identify problems. [ 129 ] they propose solutions for consideration by the full chamber. [ 129 ] in addition, they perform the function of oversight by monitoring the executive branch and investigating wrongdoing. [ 129 ] at the start of each two-year session, the house elects a speaker who does not normally preside over debates but serves as the majority party's leader. in the senate, the vice president is the ex officio president of the senate. in addition, the senate elects an officer called the president pro tempore . pro tempore means for the time being and this office is usually held by the most senior member of the senate's majority party and customarily keeps this position until there is a change in party control. accordingly, the senate does not necessarily elect a new president pro tempore at the beginning of a new congress. in the house and senate, the actual presiding officer is generally a junior member of the majority party who is appointed so that new members become acquainted with the rules of the chamber. the library of congress was established by an act of congress in 1800. it is primarily housed in three buildings on capitol hill , but also includes several other sites: the national library service for the blind and physically handicapped in washington, d.c.; the national audio-visual conservation center in culpeper, virginia ; a large book storage facility located in fort meade, maryland ; and multiple overseas offices. the library had mostly law books when it was burnt by british forces in 1814 during the war of 1812 , but the library's collections were restored and expanded when congress authorized the purchase of thomas jefferson 's private library. one of the library's missions is to serve congress and its staff as well as the american public. it is the largest library in the world with nearly 150 million items including books, films, maps, photographs, music, manuscripts, graphics, and materials in 470 languages. [ 130 ] the congressional research service, part of the library of congress, provides detailed, up-to-date and non-partisan research for senators, representatives, and their staff to help them carry out their official duties. it provides ideas for legislation, helps members analyze a bill, facilitates public hearings, makes reports, consults on matters such as parliamentary procedure, and helps the two chambers resolve disagreements. it has been called the "house's think tank" and has a staff of about 900 employees. [ 131 ] the congressional budget office (cbo) is a federal agency which provides economic data to congress. [ 132 ] it was created as an independent non-partisan agency by the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 . it helps congress estimate revenue inflows from taxes and helps the budgeting process. it makes projections about such matters as the national debt [ 133 ] as well as likely costs of legislation. it prepares an annual economic and budget outlook with a mid-year update and writes an analysis of the president's budgetary proposals for the senate's appropriations committee . the speaker of the house and the senate's president pro tempore jointly appoint the cbo director for a four-year term. lobbyists represent diverse interests and often seek to influence congressional decisions to reflect their clients' needs. lobby groups and their members sometimes write legislation and whip bills. in 2007, there were approximately 17,000 federal lobbyists in washington, d.c. [ 134 ] they explain to legislators the goals of their organizations. some lobbyists represent non-profit organizations and work pro bono for issues in which they are personally interested. congress has alternated between periods of constructive cooperation and compromise between parties, known as bipartisanship , and periods of deep political polarization and fierce infighting, known as partisanship . the period after the civil war was marked by partisanship, as is the case today. it is generally easier for committees to reach accord on issues when compromise is possible. some political scientists speculate that a prolonged period marked by narrow majorities in both chambers of congress has intensified partisanship in the last few decades, but that an alternation of control of congress between democrats and republicans may lead to greater flexibility in policies, as well as pragmatism and civility within the institution. [ 135 ] a term of congress is divided into two " sessions ", one for each year; congress has occasionally been called into an extra or special session . a new session commences on january 3 each year unless congress decides differently. the constitution requires congress to meet at least once each year and forbids either house from meeting outside the capitol without the consent of the other house. joint sessions of the united states congress occur on special occasions that require a concurrent resolution from house and senate. these sessions include counting electoral votes after a presidential election and the president's state of the union address. the constitutionally mandated report , normally given as an annual speech, is modeled on britain's speech from the throne , was written by most presidents after jefferson but personally delivered as a spoken oration beginning with wilson in 1913. joint sessions and joint meetings are traditionally presided over by the speaker of the house, except when counting presidential electoral votes when the vice president (acting as the president of the senate) presides. ideas for legislation can come from members, lobbyists, state legislatures, constituents, legislative counsel, or executive agencies. anyone can write a bill, but only members of congress may introduce bills. most bills are not written by congress members, but originate from the executive branch; interest groups often draft bills as well. the usual next step is for the proposal to be passed to a committee for review. [ 3 ] a proposal is usually in one of these forms: representatives introduce a bill while the house is in session by placing it in the hopper on the clerk's desk. [ 124 ] it is assigned a number and referred to a committee which studies each bill intensely at this stage. [ 124 ] drafting statutes requires "great skill, knowledge, and experience" and sometimes take a year or more. [ 3 ] sometimes lobbyists write legislation and submit it to a member for introduction. joint resolutions are the normal way to propose a constitutional amendment or declare war. on the other hand, concurrent resolutions (passed by both houses) and simple resolutions (passed by only one house) do not have the force of law but express the opinion of congress or regulate procedure . bills may be introduced by any member of either house. the constitution states: "all bills for raising revenue shall originate in the house of representatives." while the senate cannot originate revenue and appropriation bills , it has the power to amend or reject them. congress has sought ways to establish appropriate spending levels. [ 3 ] each chamber determines its own internal rules of operation unless specified in the constitution or prescribed by law. in the house, a rules committee guides legislation; in the senate, a standing rules committee is in charge. each branch has its own traditions; for example, the senate relies heavily on the practice of getting "unanimous consent" for noncontroversial matters. [ 3 ] house and senate rules can be complex, sometimes requiring a hundred specific steps before a bill can become a law. [ 4 ] members sometimes turn to outside experts to learn about proper congressional procedures. [ 136 ] each bill goes through several stages in each house including consideration by a committee and advice from the government accountability office . [ 3 ] most legislation is considered by standing committees which have jurisdiction over a particular subject such as agriculture or appropriations. the house has twenty standing committees; the senate has sixteen. standing committees meet at least once each month. [ 3 ] almost all standing committee meetings for transacting business must be open to the public unless the committee votes, publicly, to close the meeting. [ 3 ] a committee might call for public hearings on important bills. [ 3 ] each committee is led by a chair who belongs to the majority party and a ranking member of the minority party. witnesses and experts can present their case for or against a bill. [ 124 ] then, a bill may go to what is called a mark-up session, where committee members debate the bill's merits and may offer amendments or revisions. [ 124 ] committees may also amend the bill, but the full house holds the power to accept or reject committee amendments. after debate, the committee votes whether it wishes to report the measure to the full house. if a bill is tabled then it is rejected. if amendments are extensive, sometimes a new bill with amendments built in will be submitted as a so-called clean bill with a new number. [ 124 ] both houses have procedures under which committees can be bypassed or overruled but they are rarely used. generally, members who have been in congress longer have greater seniority and therefore greater power. [ 137 ] a bill which reaches the floor of the full house can be simple or complex [ 124 ] and begins with an enacting formula such as "be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled ..." consideration of a bill requires, itself, a rule which is a simple resolution specifying the particulars of debate – time limits, possibility of further amendments, and such. [ 124 ] each side has equal time and members can yield to other members who wish to speak. [ 124 ] sometimes opponents seek to recommit a bill which means to change part of it. [ 124 ] generally, discussion requires a quorum , usually half of the total number of representatives, before discussion can begin, although there are exceptions. [ 138 ] the house may debate and amend the bill; the precise procedures used by the house and senate differ. a final vote on the bill follows. once a bill is approved by one house, it is sent to the other which may pass, reject, or amend it. for the bill to become law, both houses must agree to identical versions of the bill. [ 124 ] if the second house amends the bill, then the differences between the two versions must be reconciled in a conference committee , an ad hoc committee that includes senators and representatives [ 124 ] sometimes by using a reconciliation process to limit budget bills. [ 3 ] both houses use a budget enforcement mechanism informally known as pay-as-you-go or paygo which discourages members from considering acts that increase budget deficits. [ 3 ] if both houses agree to the version reported by the conference committee, the bill passes, otherwise it fails. the constitution specifies that a majority of members (a quorum ) be present before doing business in each house. the rules of each house assume that a quorum is present unless a quorum call demonstrates the contrary and debate often continues despite the lack of a majority. voting within congress can take many forms, including systems using lights and bells and electronic voting. [ 3 ] both houses use voice voting to decide most matters in which members shout "aye" or "no" and the presiding officer announces the result. the constitution requires a recorded vote if demanded by one-fifth of the members present or when voting to override a presidential veto. if the voice vote is unclear or if the matter is controversial, a recorded vote usually happens. the senate uses roll-call voting , in which a clerk calls out the names of all the senators, each senator stating "aye" or "no" when their name is announced. in the senate, the vice president may cast the tie-breaking vote if present when the senators are equally divided. the house reserves roll-call votes for the most formal matters, as a roll call of all 435 representatives takes quite some time; normally, members vote by using an electronic device. in the case of a tie, the motion in question fails. most votes in the house are done electronically, allowing members to vote yea or nay or present or open . [ 3 ] members insert a voting id card and can change their votes during the last five minutes if they choose; in addition, paper ballots are used occasionally ( yea indicated by green and nay by red). [ 3 ] one member cannot cast a proxy vote for another. [ 3 ] congressional votes are recorded on an online database. [ 139 ] [ 140 ] after passage by both houses, a bill is enrolled and sent to the president for approval. [ 124 ] the president may sign it making it law or veto it, perhaps returning it to congress with the president's objections. a vetoed bill can still become law if each house of congress votes to override the veto with a two-thirds majority. finally, the president may do nothing neither signing nor vetoing the bill and then the bill becomes law automatically after ten days (not counting sundays) according to the constitution. but if congress is adjourned during this period, presidents may veto legislation passed at the end of a congressional session simply by ignoring it; the maneuver is known as a pocket veto , and cannot be overridden by the adjourned congress. senators face reelection every six years, and representatives every two. reelections encourage candidates to focus their publicity efforts at their home states or districts. [ 62 ] running for reelection can be a grueling process of distant travel and fund-raising which distracts senators and representatives from paying attention to governing, according to some critics. [ 141 ] although others respond that the process is necessary to keep members of congress in touch with voters. incumbent members of congress running for reelection have strong advantages over challengers. [ 51 ] they raise more money [ 56 ] because donors fund incumbents over challengers, perceiving the former as more likely to win, [ 54 ] [ 142 ] and donations are vital for winning elections. [ 143 ] one critic compared election to congress to receiving life tenure at a university. [ 142 ] another advantage for representatives is the practice of gerrymandering . [ 144 ] [ 145 ] after each ten-year census, states are allocated representatives based on population, and officials in power can choose how to draw the congressional district boundaries to support candidates from their party. as a result, reelection rates of members of congress hover around 90 percent, [ 8 ] causing some critics to call them a privileged class. [ 7 ] academics such as princeton's stephen macedo have proposed solutions to fix gerrymandering in the u.s. senators and representatives enjoy free mailing privileges, called franking privileges ; while these are not intended for electioneering, this rule is often skirted by borderline election-related mailings during campaigns. in 1971, the cost of running for congress in utah was $70,000 [ 146 ] but costs have climbed. [ 147 ] the biggest expense is television advertisements. [ 55 ] [ 142 ] [ 146 ] [ 148 ] [ 149 ] today's races cost more than a million dollars for a house seat, and six million or more for a senate seat. [ 7 ] [ 55 ] [ 148 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] since fundraising is vital, "members of congress are forced to spend ever-increasing hours raising money for their re-election." [ attribution needed ] [ 152 ] the supreme court has treated campaign contributions as a free speech issue. [ 147 ] some see money as a good influence in politics since it "enables candidates to communicate with voters". [ 147 ] few members retire from congress without complaining about how much it costs to campaign for reelection. [ 7 ] critics contend that members of congress are more likely to attend to the needs of heavy campaign contributors than to ordinary citizens. [ 7 ] elections are influenced by many variables. some political scientists speculate there is a coattail effect (when a popular president or party position has the effect of reelecting incumbents who win by "riding on the president's coattails"), although there is some evidence that the coattail effect is irregular and possibly declining since the 1950s. [ 51 ] some districts are so heavily democratic or republican that they are called a safe seat ; any candidate winning the primary will almost always be elected, and these candidates do not need to spend money on advertising. [ 153 ] [ 154 ] but some races can be competitive when there is no incumbent. if a seat becomes vacant in an open district, then both parties may spend heavily on advertising in these races; in california in 1992, only four of twenty races for house seats were considered highly competitive. [ 155 ] since members of congress must advertise heavily on television, this usually involves negative advertising , which smears an opponent's character without focusing on the issues. [ 156 ] negative advertising is seen as effective because "the messages tend to stick." [ 157 ] these advertisements sour the public on the political process in general as most members of congress seek to avoid blame. [ 158 ] one wrong decision or one damaging television image can mean defeat at the next election, which leads to a culture of risk avoidance, a need to make policy decisions behind closed doors, [ 158 ] [ 159 ] and concentrating publicity efforts in the members' home districts. [ 62 ] prominent founding fathers , writing in the federalist papers , felt that elections were essential to liberty, that a bond between the people and the representatives was particularly essential, [ 160 ] and that "frequent elections are unquestionably the only policy by which this dependence and sympathy can be effectually secured." [ 160 ] in 2009, few americans were familiar with leaders of congress. [ 161 ] [ 162 ] [ 163 ] the percentage of americans eligible to vote who did, in fact, vote was 63% in 1960, but has been falling since, although there was a slight upward trend in the 2008 election. [ 164 ] public opinion polls asking people if they approve of the job congress is doing have, in the last few decades, hovered around 25% with some variation. [ 7 ] [ 165 ] [ 166 ] [ 167 ] [ 168 ] [ 169 ] [ 170 ] scholar julian zeliger suggested that the "size, messiness, virtues, and vices that make congress so interesting also create enormous barriers to our understanding the institution ... unlike the presidency, congress is difficult to conceptualize." [ 171 ] other scholars suggest that despite the criticism, "congress is a remarkably resilient institution ... its place in the political process is not threatened ... it is rich in resources" and that most members behave ethically. [ 5 ] they contend that "congress is easy to dislike and often difficult to defend" and this perception is exacerbated because many challengers running for congress run against congress, which is an "old form of american politics" that further undermines congress's reputation with the public: [ 7 ] the rough-and-tumble world of legislating is not orderly and civil, human frailties too often taint its membership, and legislative outcomes are often frustrating and ineffective ... still, we are not exaggerating when we say that congress is essential to american democracy. we would not have survived as a nation without a congress that represented the diverse interests of our society, conducted a public debate on the major issues, found compromises to resolve conflicts peacefully, and limited the power of our executive, military, and judicial institutions ... the popularity of congress ebbs and flows with the public's confidence in government generally ... the legislative process is easy to dislike – it often generates political posturing and grandstanding, it necessarily involves compromise, and it often leaves broken promises in its trail. also, members of congress often appear self-serving as they pursue their political careers and represent interests and reflect values that are controversial. scandals, even when they involve a single member, add to the public's frustration with congress and have contributed to the institution's low ratings in opinion polls. an additional factor that confounds public perceptions of congress is that congressional issues are becoming more technical and complex and require expertise in subjects such as science, engineering and economics. [ 7 ] as a result, congress often cedes authority to experts at the executive branch. [ 7 ] since 2006, congress has dropped ten points in the gallup confidence poll with only nine percent having "a great deal" or "quite a lot" of confidence in their legislators. [ 172 ] since 2011, gallup poll has reported congress's approval rating among americans at 10% or below three times. [ 68 ] [ 69 ] public opinion of congress plummeted further to 5% in october 2013 after parts of the u.s. government deemed 'nonessential government' shut down. [ 70 ] when the constitution was ratified in 1787, the ratio of the populations of large states to small states was roughly twelve to one. the connecticut compromise gave every state, large and small, an equal vote in the senate. [ 173 ] since each state has two senators, residents of smaller states have more clout in the senate than residents of larger states. but since 1787, the population disparity between large and small states has grown; in 2006, for example, california had seventy times the population of wyoming . [ 174 ] critics, such as constitutional scholar sanford levinson , have suggested that the population disparity works against residents of large states and causes a steady redistribution of resources from "large states to small states". [ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] others argue that the connecticut compromise was deliberately intended by the founding fathers to construct the senate so that each state had equal footing not based on population, [ 173 ] and contend that the result works well on balance. a major role for members of congress is providing services to constituents . [ 178 ] constituents request assistance with problems. [ 179 ] providing services helps members of congress win votes and elections [ 144 ] [ 180 ] [ 181 ] and can make a difference in close races. [ 182 ] congressional staff can help citizens navigate government bureaucracies. [ 4 ] one academic described the complex intertwined relation between lawmakers and constituents as home style . [ 183 ] : 8 one way to categorize lawmakers, according to former university of rochester political science professor richard fenno , is by their general motivation: representative jim cooper of tennessee told harvard professor lawrence lessig that a chief problem with congress was that members focused on their future careers as lobbyists after serving – that congress was a " farm league for k street ". [ 184 ] [ 185 ] family members of active legislators have also been hired by lobbying firms, which while not allowed to lobby their family member, has drawn criticism as a conflict of interest. [ 186 ] members of congress have been accused of insider trading , such as in the 2020 congressional insider trading scandal , where members of congress or their family members have traded on stocks related to work on their committees. [ 187 ] one 2011 study concluded that portfolios of members of congress outperformed both the market and hedge funds, which the authors suggested as evidence of insider trading. [ 188 ] proposed solutions include putting stocks in blind trusts to prevent future insider trading. [ 189 ] some members of congress have gone on lavish trips paid for by outside groups, sometimes bringing family members, which are often legal even if in an ethical gray area. [ 190 ] [ 191 ] some critics complain congressional pay is high compared with a median american income . [ 192 ] others have countered that congressional pay is consistent with other branches of government . [ 165 ] another criticism is that members of congress are insulated from the health care market due to their coverage. [ 193 ] others have criticized the wealth of members of congress. [ 146 ] [ 149 ] in january 2014, it was reported that for the first time over half of the members of congress were millionaires. [ 194 ] congress has been criticized for trying to conceal pay raises by slipping them into a large bill at the last minute. [ 195 ] members elected since 1984 are covered by the federal employees retirement system (fers). like other federal employees, congressional retirement is funded through taxes and participants' contributions. members of congress under fers contribute 1.3% of their salary into the fers retirement plan and pay 6.2% of their salary in social security taxes. and like federal employees, members contribute one-third of the cost of health insurance with the government covering the other two-thirds. [ 196 ] the size of a congressional pension depends on the years of service and the average of the highest three years of their salary. by law, the starting amount of a member's retirement annuity may not exceed 80% of their final salary. in 2018, the average annual pension for retired senators and representatives under the civil service retirement system (csrs) was $75,528, while those who retired under fers, or in combination with csrs, was $41,208. [ 197 ] members of congress make fact-finding missions to learn about other countries and stay informed, but these outings can cause controversy if the trip is deemed excessive or unconnected with the task of governing. for example, the wall street journal reported in 2009 that lawmaker trips abroad at taxpayer expense had included spas, $300-per-night extra unused rooms, and shopping excursions. [ 198 ] some lawmakers responded that "traveling with spouses compensates for being away from them a lot in washington" and justify the trips as a way to meet officials in other nations. [ 198 ] by the twenty-seventh amendment , changes to congressional pay may not take effect before the next election to the house of the representatives. [ 199 ] in boehner v. anderson , the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ruled that the amendment does not affect cost-of-living adjustments . [ 200 ] [ 199 ] the franking privilege allows members of congress to send official mail to constituents at government expense. though they are not permitted to send election materials, borderline material is often sent, especially in the run-up to an election by those in close races. [ 201 ] [ 202 ] some academics consider free mailings as giving incumbents a big advantage over challengers. [ 8 ] [ failed verification ] [ 203 ] members of congress enjoy parliamentary privilege , including freedom from arrest in all cases except for treason , felony , and breach of the peace , and freedom of speech in debate. this constitutionally derived immunity applies to members during sessions and when traveling to and from sessions. [ 204 ] the term "arrest" has been interpreted broadly, and includes any detention or delay in the course of law enforcement , including court summons and subpoenas . the rules of the house strictly guard this privilege; a member may not waive the privilege on their own but must seek the permission of the whole house to do so. senate rules are less strict and permit individual senators to waive the privilege as they choose. [ 205 ] the constitution guarantees absolute freedom of debate in both houses, providing in the speech or debate clause of the constitution that "for any speech or debate in either house, they shall not be questioned in any other place." accordingly, a member of congress may not be sued in court for slander because of remarks made in either house, although each house has its own rules restricting offensive speeches, and may punish members who transgress. [ 206 ] obstructing the work of congress is a crime under federal law and is known as contempt of congress . each member has the power to cite people for contempt but can only issue a contempt citation – the judicial system pursues the matter like a normal criminal case. if convicted in court of contempt of congress, a person may be imprisoned for up to one year. [ 207 ] 38°53′23″n 77°0′32″w ﻿ / ﻿ 38.88972°n 77.00889°w ﻿ / 38.88972; -77.00889

interactive storytelling (also known as interactive drama ) is a form of digital entertainment in which the storyline is not predetermined. the author creates the setting, characters, and situation which the narrative must address, but the user (also reader or player) experiences a unique story based on their interactions with the story world. the architecture of an interactive storytelling program includes a drama manager, user model, and agent model to control, respectively, aspects of narrative production, player uniqueness, and character knowledge and behavior. [ 1 ] together, these systems generate characters that act "human," alter the world in real-time reactions to the player, and ensure that new narrative events unfold comprehensibly. the field of study surrounding interactive storytelling encompasses many disparate fields, including psychology , sociology , cognitive science , linguistics , natural language processing , user interface design , computer science , and emergent intelligence. they fall under the umbrella term of human-computer interaction (hci), at the intersection of hard science and the humanities. [ 2 ] the difficulty of producing an effective interactive storytelling system is attributed to the ideological division between professionals in each field: artists have trouble constraining themselves to logical and linear systems and programmers are disinclined to appreciate or incorporate the abstract and unproven concepts of the humanities. [ 3 ] what characteristics distinguish an interactive story from another form of interactive media is subject to much debate. interactivity and storytelling are both polysemic terms, and the phrase "interactive storytelling" does not inherently distinguish it from other kinds of storytelling, many of which are already interactive to some extent. some of the literature associated with the term "interactive storytelling" is actually about transmedia storytelling , which is not a form of entertainment, but a marketing strategy for building a compelling brand across digital platforms. varying levels of interactivity are a function of the "relatedness of transmitted messages with previous exchanges of information where sender and receiver roles become interchangeable." [ 4 ] storytelling, in this case, refers to the process of active creation and authoring rather than the final product and its passive reception. interactive storytelling by this definition can entail any media that allows the user to generate several unique dramatic narratives. though its final goal is a fully unauthored ai environment with a comprehensive human-level understanding of narrative construction (e.g., the holodeck ), projects that use branching stories and variable gates are considered experimental prototypes in the same genre. [ 5 ] interactive storytelling is defined as distinct from interactive fiction (or if), as well as video games with strong narrative focus ( mass effect , bioshock , etc.), by user agency and open-ended narrative . david gaider , an rpg developer at bioware , stated that "every possible branch needs to be written and fully realized, even if not every player sees it, and thus any game which allows for a lot of player choice becomes a much more expensive proposition for a developer." [ 6 ] if and video games, to balance user choice with authorial effort, must constrain the directions the narrative can take with puzzles, battles, or unchangeable plot points and bottlenecks, all of which detract from a sense of immersion. [ 7 ] only the most critical of the user's narrative choices are used or remembered in narrative development, according to the need to fulfill specific player goals that define a "gameplay" experience. [ 8 ] a true is system would incorporate all of them, as do living human agents, simultaneously and continuously - a task only artificial intelligence can meet. [ 4 ] sandbox games like the sims and spore , which do involve extensive ai-based social interaction, do not manage dramatic tension or produce a cohesive narrative . [ 9 ] to mateas and stern, creators of façade and the party , interactive storytelling is best understood as interactive theater, in that its goal is dramatic meaning rather than fun. [ 10 ] it was chris crawford who coined the term interactive storytelling in the 1990s, arguing that is is not a video game with a narrative, and that a game and is cannot be combined successfully. [ 3 ] because of limited technology and the amount of work required, it is still difficult to combine a robust interactive storytelling system and a game engine without detracting from the effectiveness of both. emerging voices in the field, however, argue for the possibilities of adding narrative complexity and realistic characters to existing video game genres. using made (massive artificial drama engine), a team of ai researchers developed a genetic algorithm to guide emergent behavior for secondary non-player characters (npcs) based on literary archetypes . [ 11 ] in the ai engine of the elder scrolls v: skyrim , this was tested to elaborate on the mechanistic behavior of townspeople: ...hungry inhabitants could become thieves, guards could pursue the thieves, villagers could fall in love with others, or different war alliances could emerge. early attempts to understand interactive storytelling date back to the 1970s with such efforts as roger schank 's research at northwestern university and the experimental program talespin. [ 12 ] in the early 1980s michael liebowitz developed "universe", a conceptual system for a kind of interactive storytelling. in 1986, brenda laurel published her phd dissertation, "toward the design of a computer-based interactive fantasy system." [ 13 ] during the 1990s, a number of research projects began to appear, such as the oz project led by dr. joseph bates and carnegie mellon university , the software agents group at massachusetts institute of technology , the improv project led by ken perlin at new york university , and the virtual theater group at stanford, led by barbara hayes-roth . there were also a number of conferences touching upon these subjects, such as the workshop on interactive fiction & synthetic realities in 1990; interactive story systems: plot & character at stanford in 1995; the aaai workshop on ai and entertainment, 1996; lifelike computer characters, snowbird, utah, october 1996; the first international conference on autonomous agents at marina del rey, ca. february 5–8, 1997. [ citation needed ] the first conference to directly address the research area was the 1st international conference on technologies for interactive digital storytelling and entertainment, which took place in march 2003 and focused specifically on concepts and first prototypes for automated storytelling and autonomous characters, including modeling of emotions and the user experience. [ 14 ] the concepts were developed by chris crawford , in his 2005 book. [ 15 ] in the 2000s, work on interactive storytelling and related topics expanded, and was presented at events including the alternating bi-yearly conferences, tidse (conference on technologies for interactive digital storytelling and entertainment) and icvs (international conference on virtual storytelling), hosted in germany and france, respectively. tidse and icvs were superseded by icids (international conference on interactive digital storytelling), a yearly event established in 2008. [ citation needed ] the first published interactive storytelling software that was widely recognized as the "real thing" was façade , created by michael mateas and andrew stern. the system was publicly released in 2006, [ 16 ] and was the winner of the grand jury prize at the 2006 slamdance independent games festival . [ 17 ] the architecture of an interactive storytelling system has three component parts: a drama manager, a user model, and an agent model. the drama manager is responsible for guiding the narrative by searching and executing story "beats" in a coherent sequence, refining story events by providing new information and reconciling contradictory plots, and collaborating with the agent model to choose the best narrative actions for the characters. [ 4 ] it monitors a number of overview variables in the storyworld to make the best decision for the narrative, defined by the goals of the author: a measure of worldwide conflict would help to increase or decrease dramatic tension, while measures of relationships and likability could guide a story towards a romantic storyline. [ 18 ] the agent model collects information about the story world and characters and generates possible actions in response for each non-player character in the story. possible actions are drawn from the personality and emotional model of the character, allowing each one to exhibit autonomous behavior with intelligent dramatic goals. [ 4 ] finally, the user model keeps track of player choices and inputs, such that the drama manager and agent model can cooperate with the way the user attempts to play rather than challenging or misunderstanding their decisions. crawford discusses three potential strategies for developing interactive storytelling systems. firstly, environmental approaches are those which take an interactive system, such as a computer game, and encourage the actions of a user in such a way as to form a coherent plot. with a sufficiently complex system, emergent behavior may form story-like behavior regardless of the user's actions. secondly, data-driven strategies have a library of "story components" which are sufficiently general that they can be combined smoothly in response to a user's actions (or lack thereof). this approach has the advantage of being more general that the directed environmental approach, at the cost of a much larger initial investment. finally, language-based approaches require that the user and system share some, very limited, domain-specific language so that they can react to each other and the system can 'understand' a greater proportion of the users actions. crawford suggests approaches that only use, for example, pictorial languages or restricted versions of english. [ 19 ] planning-based systems can be integrated into any of the above approaches to ensure narrative cohesion. the system does this by anticipating potential holes in the plot and repairing them by introducing new information and events. two such systems include automated story director (asd), which forms narrative repairs based on plot points predefined by the author, and player-specific automated storytelling (past), which chooses from several possible repairs according to the player's previous behaviors. [ 20 ] past characterizes a player along five vectors of style based on robin laws ' work on player types—fighter, power gamer, storyteller, method actor, and tactician—and may choose to solve a broken plot point for a fighter by adding a battle with a new character, or for a storyteller by adding new background information that justifies the break. the success of an interactive storytelling experience depends on a balanced dramatic structure and user agency. a dramatically interesting narrative experience is one that moderates tension between characters and events over time, such that conflicts arise logically and are not left without resolution. it must also differ noticeably on every "playthrough" as a function of the user's freedom to interact with characters and objects in the virtual world. [ 7 ] this can be achieved to varying degrees of success by branching, emergent, character-driven, and plot-driven systems, but no existing system fully achieves a lifelike experience. ais do not yet have a human grasp of the rules of drama and narrative, so existing interactive dramas produce a limited number of significantly different story outcomes, relative to the amount of labor required of the author. there have been several attempts at formalizing an evaluation system for interactive dramas, despite the fact that all existing projects are still in experimental stages. player agency and fun remain the primary concerns, though fun is often exchanged for more narrative-specific metrics, like "interestingness" and "suspense." [ 21 ] likert scales filled out by players create a rough quantitative picture of user experience, but leave out much of the subjective interpretation that lies behind complex human interactions. mehta et al. focused on conversation-centric systems to develop qualitative metrics for the user's successful engagements, instead of quantitative measures of "inappropriate utterances" (in which the ai misunderstands player input and responds nonsensically) and other technical failures. [ 22 ] after a "breakdown" in conversation, how effectively the user incorporates it into the overall understanding of the characters and story depends on design features. in their study of façade , some ai actor breakdowns include shallow semantic understanding, inverted meanings, and the timing of responses. artificially intelligent agents have trouble translating ambiguous user input into the limited narrative meaning system, as when "sad" or "hurt" is interpreted only as a reference to clinical depression. [ 23 ] similarly, negative and positive user sentiments are often confused with one another, especially if a positive statement is preceded by disagreement with a negative one. this is exacerbated if a user cannot send a reply fast enough – their utterance is understood as referring to the most recent speaker, leading to unintended interactions. however, background information is referenced often enough for a player to invent narrative justifications for apparently strange behaviors, which most participants did. [ 24 ] the oz project was an attempt in the early 1990s to use intelligent agent technology to attack the challenges in is. its architecture included a simulated physical world, several characters, an interactor, a theory of presentation, and a drama manager. [ citation needed ] users communicated with the system using either a text based or graphical interface. [ 25 ] [ 26 ] façade is an artificial-intelligence-based approach created by michael mateas and andrew stern. it was the winner of the grand jury prize at the 2006 slamdance independent games festival and is recognized as the first true interactive storytelling software. it is text based and uses natural language processing and other artificial intelligence routines to direct the action. [ 15 ] [ 16 ] the hybrid evolutionary-fuzzy time-based interactive (hefti) storytelling system was produced at the university of texas at austin and uses genetic algorithms to recombine and evaluate story components generated from a set of story templates. [ 27 ] although crawford described it as the "wrong approach to development systems [...] incomprehensible to the kind of creative talent needed for storytelling," [ 15 ] it continues to be discussed as a research and approach and genetic algorithm continue to be considered a potential tool for use in the area. figa and tarau have used wordnet to build technologies useful to interactive storytelling. [ 28 ] this approach defines 'story traces' as an abstract reduction (or skeleton) of a story, and 'story projection' as a fragment of a story that can be treated as a single dramatic building block. this work seeks to build up large repositories of narrative forms in such a way that these forms can later be combined. [ 15 ] as defined by stephen dinehart, interactive narrative design combines ludology , narratology and game design to form interactive entertainment development methodologies. interactive entertainment experiences allow the player to witness data as navigable, participatory, and dramatic in real-time: [ 29 ] “a narratological craft which focuses on the structuralist , or literary semiotic creation of stories." interactive narrative design seeks to accomplish this via viewer/user/player (vup) navigated dataspaces. [ 30 ] interactive narrative design focuses on creating meaningful participatory story experiences with interactive systems. the aim is to transport the player through play into the videogame (dataspace) using their visual and auditory senses. [ 31 ] when interactive narrative design is successful, the vup (viewer/user/player) believes that they are experiencing a story. [ 29 ] tour-réservoir is the first generative web series, conceived by french artist jean michel bruyère and his collective lfks. launched in 2016, it was developed and realised in co-operation with le volcan - scène nationale du havre, 296 inhabitants from a suburb of the city of le havre in france and more than 100 local music groups. the website platform offers an active visit through five media – radio, tv, book, series, music video. the users can choose among a wide range of material which topics, actress(es) and music they want to appear/listen to and they can edit their own episodes or music videos. it was nominated at the côté court [ 32 ] short film festival in pantin (paris) in the new media category in 2017. story possibilities are not precisely calculable, and are represented as orders, such that o(10) would be in the order of tens of stories, and o(1) would be fewer than 10 unique story possibilities.

façade is a 2005 interactive storytelling video game by michael mateas and andrew stern. conceived by the developers as an "interactive drama", façade tasks the player to use text input to converse with two characters, trip and grace, who are experiencing conflicts in their relationship. the game uses artificial intelligence methods, including natural language processing , to simulate a conversation between the player and two characters. the developers, mateas and stern, both carried an interest in artificial intelligence and interactive entertainment, and began work on the game in 1998. upon release, façade received praise for its innovative design and generated commentary about the potential use of artificial intelligence in video games . it received the grand jury prize at the slamdance independent games festival and was a finalist for the 2004 seumas mcnally grand prize . following release, façade received further retrospective praise for its design, although sources expressed mixed views on the contemporary impact and influence of the game. due to the awkward and unexpected behaviour that could occur from its interaction model, the game generated a cult following and internet memes from let's play videos on youtube . a planned sequel, the party , was announced but discontinued in 2013. played in a first-person perspective , the game is set in an apartment where the player can move around freely using the keyboard. prior to starting the game, the player also selects a name from a list, which is reflected in how the game's two characters, trip and grace, address them. [ 2 ] players interact with trip and grace using text input to speak, or can use the mouse to select parts of their body to interact with, including options to comfort, hug or kiss the characters at any time. [ 3 ] [ 4 ] the game uses natural language processing , identifying certain key words in player input and deducing its context, to influence the conversation and the reaction of trip and grace to the player's conduct. [ 3 ] the couple can react to these in several ways, such as laughter, excitement, surprise, and anger. if the player behaves inappropriately, trip and grace react with great offense. [ 5 ] persistent rudeness can lead to the player's removal, [ 6 ] and so does excessive physical intimacy. [ 4 ] the behaviour of the characters and the progression of the narrative is open-ended, influenced by these interactions. [ 7 ] players can also click to interact with various objects and pieces of furniture in the apartment, which prompt reactions or new conversations from the characters. [ 5 ] [ 8 ] [ 7 ] façade is an interactive drama video game, structured as a one-act story about a married couple, trip and grace. [ 6 ] the player assumes the role of a long-time friend, invited for an evening get-together at the couple's apartment in new york city. at first, trip and grace are friendly, but they become hostile as the player witnesses the devolution of their marriage. [ 8 ] the game begins with a black screen and a voiceover from trip, who is calling the player to invite them to the apartment. [ 9 ] after the player has chosen their name, they spawn in front of the door, overhearing an argument between the couple. afterwards, trip opens the door and lets the player inside. [ 3 ] the player can discuss various topics with grace and trip during their stay, such as the couple's recent vacation in italy, the drinks trip prepares at the bar, and grace's attempts at redecorating the apartment. [ 10 ] other subjects of conversation can be about their work, hobbies, families, sex life, or the prospect of their divorce. [ 5 ] as façade progresses, the couple gets into a fight, exchanging various accusations and passive-aggressive remarks. [ 11 ] [ 7 ] the player is prompted to take sides in the argument, which culminates in either grace or trip asking them a question about their relationship. [ 3 ] when the game approaches its final phase, the couple seek advice from their friend about how to fix their marriage and what is wrong with either of them. [ 2 ] eventually, grace or trip can confess a long-kept secret about themselves or the relationship. for example, before the night trip proposed to her, grace had a sexual affair with someone without telling him. [ 12 ] afterwards, façade will end in three ways: either trip or grace end their relationship, the two reconcile, or they tell the player that nothing has changed and continue arguing once they have left. [ 5 ] the game is meant to be replayed several times , so that the player can discover other ways their conversations with the couple could have gone. [ 13 ] mateas co-developed façade with andrew stern over five years, self-funded and with a limited budget. prior to development, mateas was a doctoral student at the carnegie mellon school of computer science, and stern was a programmer and designer on the virtual pet video game series petz . [ 3 ] mateas and stern met presenting at a series of conferences on the intersection of artificial intelligence and interactive entertainment, and began initial work in 1998 on a long-term "interactive drama piece" and "commercial product prototype". [ 12 ] in 2000, mateas and stern formally commenced a full-time collaborative project to "build an interactive story world integrating believable agents and interactive plot", with a plan to create a game around a "domestic drama in which a married couple has invited a player over for dinner." [ 14 ] to develop organic and believable character behaviors, mateas and stern developed a complex programming framework named "a behaviour language" to program and organize the expressions of multiple characters as "believable agents", and a "drama manager" to organise events in the story to guide the interactions towards a tension and resolution of the plot. [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] façade was released for windows in july 2005 as a free download from the developers' web site. following the release of façade , mateas and stern planned to create a follow-up project titled the party . building on the design of façade , the party was planned to feature around the plot of being invited a dinner party, in which gameplay would be expanded to accommodate ten characters, greater environmental interaction, and more mature complex narrative beats, including sex and violence. [ 3 ] intended as a commercial product, stern noted that the party required investment to fund a small team of designers and programmers necessary to create the game's artificial intelligence . [ 2 ] in 2013, mateas confirmed that development on the party had ceased in order to pursue other projects. [ 18 ] many critics gave façade positive reviews at the time of its release. several publications like nbc news , [ 4 ] the new york times , newsweek , and the boston phoenix praised the game for its technical achievements, writing that it was an important step for the evolution of video games, interactive entertainment, and ai. [ 9 ] gamasutra wrote that façade was "one of the most important games ever created, possibly the most important game of the last ten years," above the sims and grand theft auto . the reviewer, ernest adams, called the game's design "revolutionary" and "technically ambitious", listing five areas of technical achievement: its natural language parsing and conversational interaction, natural language generation, emotional modelling, facial expressions, and body language. [ 19 ] the economist mused: "as graphics improve, artificial intelligence is becoming an ever more important part of designing video games." [ 20 ] critics also wrote about how the game handled its characters and story, and they also found its attempts innovative. adams praised façade for being unlike most video games at the time, highlighting its lack of a victory condition and focus on personal relationships that he found believable. [ 19 ] many others said that façade showed, with complex ai, that video games could be just as compelling when they are character-driven instead of action-driven. [ 10 ] [ 21 ] as set schiesel, who did the new york times review, wrote: "[this] is a future where games are driven as strongly by characters as combat [and] as much soap opera as shooting gallery". [ 10 ] newsweek and nbc news argued that façade represented a step in the right direction for creating interactive drama characters with emotional depth; [ 21 ] [ 22 ] newsweek said that this had special appeal towards female gamers, who began to be represented only within the past decade. [ 21 ] other publications covered the game's open-ended nature and praised how the player could change the story in real time instead of adhering to a pre-determined narrative branch. [ 9 ] [ 19 ] in the views of wired , façade 's approach provided a more immersive experience. [ 9 ] façade won the grand jury prize at the 2006 slamdance independent games festival. [ 23 ] an early version of the game was also nominated as a finalist for the open category of the seumas mcnally grand prize at the 2004 independent games festival . [ 24 ] [ 25 ] retrospective assessments of façade have recognized the game's technical achievement in its application of artificial intelligence and popular appeal. describing the game as an "important research and cultural milestone", game developer , formerly gamasutra, identified façade as a project that made an "indelible mark on video games" due to the uniqueness and complexity of its design of artificial intelligence. [ 5 ] similarly, the guardian cited façade as an "interesting" milestone and "fascinating experiment" in the advancement of emotional artificial intelligence . [ 16 ] the game was also recognized to have attracted mainstream attention, unusual for an independent video game at the time. rock paper shotgun noted the game "was cutting edge enough to warrant scientific papers being written about it, but playable and interesting enough to be spread around the games world". [ 26 ] throughout the decade since its release, façade developed a cult following and spawned several internet memes , largely due to " let's play " videos on youtube that exploited grace and trip's awkward reactions to what the ai deemed inappropriate behavior, which was sometimes nonsensical. [ 5 ] many high-profile youtubers at the time accrued millions of views on their playthroughs; pc gamer attributed the game's "second coming as an internet meme" to pewdiepie 's first video about the game, which garnered over seven million views, and also named jacksepticeye and the gaming lemon as further contributors to increasing façade 's mainstream exposure. [ 8 ] game developer commented that "arguably [ façade 's ] biggest impact is that people know what it is outside of the academic conference circuit". [ 5 ] some retrospective reviews have expressed mixed views on façade's execution as a simulation of interpersonal interaction, with rock paper shotgun observing that the subsequent influence of the game on the broader industry had been largely overstated. [ 26 ] pc gamer noted that "if you play façade as it was intended...their ai system holds up remarkably well", praising the character reactions to player inputs, although noting the game's "reliance on genuine interaction...makes it ripe for abuse". [ 8 ] describing the game as "an experiment rather than a finished game", chris dahlen, writing for 1001 video games you must play before you die , noted "the graphics are basic, and the parser's not perfect; grace and trip often react to a suggestion they don't recognize with an awkward stare or look of horror." [ 6 ] although considering the game's praise as warranted and "hugely influential" of its time, julie fukunaga of stanford daily critiqued the game as "visually jarring" and "frequently glitchy", finding the narrative presented an unrealistic representation of marital conflict and featured "irredeemable characters". [ 27 ]

a chatbot (originally chatterbot ) [ 1 ] is a software application or web interface designed to have textual or spoken conversations. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] modern chatbots are typically online and use generative artificial intelligence systems that are capable of maintaining a conversation with a user in natural language and simulating the way a human would behave as a conversational partner. such chatbots often use deep learning and natural language processing , but simpler chatbots have existed for decades. although chatbots have existed since the late 1960s, the field gained widespread attention in the early 2020s due to the popularity of openai 's chatgpt , [ 5 ] [ 6 ] followed by alternatives such as microsoft 's copilot , deepseek and google 's gemini . [ 7 ] such examples reflect the recent practice of basing such products upon broad foundational large language models , such as gpt-4 or the gemini language model , that get fine-tuned so as to target specific tasks or applications (i.e., simulating human conversation, in the case of chatbots). chatbots can also be designed or customized to further target even more specific situations and/or particular subject-matter domains. [ 8 ] a major area where chatbots have long been used is in customer service and support , with various sorts of virtual assistants . [ 9 ] companies spanning a wide range of industries have begun using the latest generative artificial intelligence technologies to power more advanced developments in such areas. [ 8 ] in 1950, alan turing 's famous article " computing machinery and intelligence " was published, [ 10 ] which proposed what is now called the turing test as a criterion of intelligence . this criterion depends on the ability of a computer program to impersonate a human in a real-time written conversation with a human judge to the extent that the judge is unable to distinguish reliably—on the basis of the conversational content alone—between the program and a real human. the notoriety of turing's proposed test stimulated great interest in joseph weizenbaum 's program eliza , published in 1966, which seemed to be able to fool users into believing that they were conversing with a real human. however weizenbaum himself did not claim that eliza was genuinely intelligent, and the introduction to his paper presented it more as a debunking exercise: in artificial intelligence, machines are made to behave in wondrous ways, often sufficient to dazzle even the most experienced observer. but once a particular program is unmasked, once its inner workings are explained, its magic crumbles away; it stands revealed as a mere collection of procedures. the observer says to himself "i could have written that". with that thought, he moves the program in question from the shelf marked "intelligent", to that reserved for curios. the object of this paper is to cause just such a re-evaluation of the program about to be "explained". few programs ever needed it more. [ 11 ] eliza's key method of operation involves the recognition of clue words or phrases in the input, and the output of the corresponding pre-prepared or pre-programmed responses that can move the conversation forward in an apparently meaningful way (e.g. by responding to any input that contains the word 'mother' with 'tell me more about your family'). [ 11 ] thus an illusion of understanding is generated, even though the processing involved has been merely superficial. eliza showed that such an illusion is surprisingly easy to generate because human judges are ready to give the benefit of the doubt when conversational responses are capable of being interpreted as "intelligent". interface designers have come to appreciate that humans' readiness to interpret computer output as genuinely conversational—even when it is actually based on rather simple pattern-matching—can be exploited for useful purposes. most people prefer to engage with programs that are human-like, and this gives chatbot-style techniques a potentially useful role in interactive systems that need to elicit information from users, as long as that information is relatively straightforward and falls into predictable categories. thus, for example, online help systems can usefully employ chatbot techniques to identify the area of help that users require, potentially providing a "friendlier" interface than a more formal search or menu system. this sort of usage holds the prospect of moving chatbot technology from weizenbaum's "shelf ... reserved for curios" to that marked "genuinely useful computational methods". among the most notable early chatbots are eliza (1966) and parry (1972). [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] more recent notable programs include a.l.i.c.e. , jabberwacky and d.u.d.e ( agence nationale de la recherche and cnrs 2006). while eliza and parry were used exclusively to simulate typed conversation, many chatbots now include other functional features, such as games and web searching abilities. in 1984, a book called the policeman's beard is half constructed was published, allegedly written by the chatbot racter (though the program as released would not have been capable of doing so). [ 16 ] from 1978 [ 17 ] to some time after 1983, [ 18 ] the cyrus project led by janet kolodner constructed a chatbot simulating cyrus vance (57th united states secretary of state ). it used case-based reasoning , and updated its database daily by parsing wire news from united press international . the program was unable to process the news items subsequent to the surprise resignation of cyrus vance in april 1980, and the team constructed another chatbot simulating his successor, edmund muskie . [ 19 ] [ 18 ] one pertinent field of ai research is natural-language processing . usually, weak ai fields employ specialized software or programming languages created specifically for the narrow function required. for example, a.l.i.c.e. uses a markup language called aiml, [ 3 ] which is specific to its function as a conversational agent , and has since been adopted by various other developers of, so-called, alicebots . nevertheless, a.l.i.c.e. is still purely based on pattern matching techniques without any reasoning capabilities, the same technique eliza was using back in 1966. this is not strong ai, which would require sapience and logical reasoning abilities. jabberwacky learns new responses and context based on real-time user interactions , rather than being driven from a static database . some more recent chatbots also combine real-time learning with evolutionary algorithms that optimize their ability to communicate based on each conversation held. chatbot competitions focus on the turing test or more specific goals. two such annual contests are the loebner prize and the chatterbox challenge (the latter has been offline since 2015, however, materials can still be found from web archives). [ 20 ] dbpedia created a chatbot during the gsoc of 2017. [ 21 ] it can communicate through facebook messenger . modern chatbots like chatgpt are often based on large language models called generative pre-trained transformers (gpt). they are based on a deep learning architecture called the transformer , which contains artificial neural networks . they learn how to generate text by being trained on a large text corpus , which provides a solid foundation for the model to perform well on downstream tasks with limited amounts of task-specific data. despite criticism of its accuracy and tendency to "hallucinate"—that is, to confidently output false information and even cite non-existent sources—chatgpt has gained attention for its detailed responses and historical knowledge. another example is biogpt, developed by microsoft , which focuses on answering biomedical questions. [ 22 ] [ 23 ] in november 2023, amazon announced a new chatbot, called q, for people to use at work. [ 24 ] many companies' chatbots run on messaging apps or simply via sms . they are used for b2c customer service, sales and marketing. [ 25 ] in 2016, facebook messenger allowed developers to place chatbots on their platform. there were 30,000 bots created for messenger in the first six months, rising to 100,000 by september 2017. [ 26 ] since september 2017, this has also been as part of a pilot program on whatsapp. airlines klm and aeroméxico both announced their participation in the testing; [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] both airlines had previously launched customer services on the facebook messenger platform. the bots usually appear as one of the user's contacts, but can sometimes act as participants in a group chat . many banks, insurers, media companies, e-commerce companies, airlines, hotel chains, retailers, health care providers, government entities, and restaurant chains have used chatbots to answer simple questions , increase customer engagement , [ 31 ] for promotion, and to offer additional ways to order from them. [ 32 ] chatbots are also used in market research to collect short survey responses. [ 33 ] a 2017 study showed 4% of companies used chatbots. [ 34 ] in a 2016 study, 80% of businesses said they intended to have one by 2020. [ 35 ] previous generations of chatbots were present on company websites, e.g. ask jenn from alaska airlines which debuted in 2008 [ 36 ] or expedia 's virtual customer service agent which launched in 2011. [ 36 ] [ 37 ] the newer generation of chatbots includes ibm watson -powered "rocky", introduced in february 2017 by the new york city-based e-commerce company rare carat to provide information to prospective diamond buyers. [ 38 ] [ 39 ] used by marketers to script sequences of messages, very similar to an autoresponder sequence. such sequences can be triggered by user opt-in or the use of keywords within user interactions. after a trigger occurs a sequence of messages is delivered until the next anticipated user response. each user response is used in the decision tree to help the chatbot navigate the response sequences to deliver the correct response message. companies have used chatbots for customer support, human resources, or in internet-of-things (iot) projects. overstock.com , for one, has reportedly launched a chatbot named mila to attempt to automate certain processes when customer service employees request sick leave. [ 40 ] other large companies such as lloyds banking group , royal bank of scotland , renault and citroën are now using chatbots instead of call centres with humans to provide a first point of contact. [ citation needed ] in large companies, like in hospitals and aviation organizations, chatbots are also used to share information within organizations, and to assist and replace service desks. [ citation needed ] chatbots have been proposed as a replacement for customer service departments. [ 41 ] deep learning techniques can be incorporated into chatbot applications to allow them to map conversations between users and customer service agents, especially in social media. [ 42 ] in 2019, gartner predicted that by 2021, 15% of all customer service interactions globally will be handled completely by ai. [ 43 ] a study by juniper research in 2019 estimates retail sales resulting from chatbot-based interactions will reach $112 billion by 2023. [ 44 ] in 2016, russia-based tochka bank launched a chatbot on facebook for a range of financial services, including a possibility of making payments. [ 45 ] in july 2016, barclays africa also launched a facebook chatbot. [ 46 ] in 2023, us-based national eating disorders association replaced its human helpline staff with a chatbot but had to take it offline after users reported receiving harmful advice from it. [ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] chatbots are also appearing in the healthcare industry. [ 50 ] [ 51 ] a study suggested that physicians in the united states believed that chatbots would be most beneficial for scheduling doctor appointments, locating health clinics, or providing medication information. [ 52 ] chatgpt is able to answer user queries related to health promotion and disease prevention such as screening and vaccination . [ 53 ] whatsapp has teamed up with the world health organization (who) to make a chatbot service that answers users' questions on covid-19 . [ 54 ] in 2020, the government of india launched a chatbot called mygov corona helpdesk, [ 55 ] that worked through whatsapp and helped people access information about the coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic. [ 56 ] [ 57 ] certain patient groups are still reluctant to use chatbots. a mixed-methods 2019 study showed that people are still hesitant to use chatbots for their healthcare due to poor understanding of the technological complexity, the lack of empathy, and concerns about cyber-security. the analysis showed that while 6% had heard of a health chatbot and 3% had experience of using it, 67% perceived themselves as likely to use one within 12 months. the majority of participants would use a health chatbot for seeking general health information (78%), booking a medical appointment (78%), and looking for local health services (80%). however, a health chatbot was perceived as less suitable for seeking results of medical tests and seeking specialist advice such as sexual health. [ 58 ] the analysis of attitudinal variables showed that most participants reported their preference for discussing their health with doctors (73%) and having access to reliable and accurate health information (93%). while 80% were curious about new technologies that could improve their health, 66% reported only seeking a doctor when experiencing a health problem and 65% thought that a chatbot was a good idea. 30% reported dislike about talking to computers, 41% felt it would be strange to discuss health matters with a chatbot and about half were unsure if they could trust the advice given by a chatbot. therefore, perceived trustworthiness, individual attitudes towards bots, and dislike for talking to computers are the main barriers to health chatbots. [ 58 ] [ 53 ] in new zealand, the chatbot sam – short for semantic analysis machine [ 59 ] – has been developed by nick gerritsen of touchtech. [ 60 ] it is designed to share its political thoughts, for example on topics such as climate change, healthcare and education, etc. it talks to people through facebook messenger. [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] in 2022, the chatbot "leader lars" or "leder lars" was nominated for the synthetic party to run in the danish parliamentary election, [ 65 ] and was built by the artist collective computer lars. [ 66 ] leader lars differed from earlier virtual politicians by leading a political party and by not pretending to be an objective candidate. [ 67 ] this chatbot engaged in critical discussions on politics with users from around the world. [ 68 ] in india , the state government has launched a chatbot for its aaple sarkar platform, [ 69 ] which provides conversational access to information regarding public services managed. [ 70 ] [ 71 ] chatbots have also been incorporated into devices not primarily meant for computing, such as toys. [ 72 ] hello barbie is an internet-connected version of the doll that uses a chatbot provided by the company toytalk, [ 73 ] which previously used the chatbot for a range of smartphone-based characters for children. [ 74 ] these characters' behaviors are constrained by a set of rules that in effect emulate a particular character and produce a storyline. [ 75 ] the my friend cayla doll was marketed as a line of 18-inch (46 cm) dolls which uses speech recognition technology in conjunction with an android or ios mobile app to recognize the child's speech and have a conversation. like the hello barbie doll, it attracted controversy due to vulnerabilities with the doll's bluetooth stack and its use of data collected from the child's speech. ibm's watson computer has been used as the basis for chatbot-based educational toys for companies such as cognitoys, [ 72 ] intended to interact with children for educational purposes. [ 76 ] malicious chatbots are frequently used to fill chat rooms with spam and advertisements by mimicking human behavior and conversations or to entice people into revealing personal information, such as bank account numbers. they were commonly found on yahoo! messenger , windows live messenger , aol instant messenger and other instant messaging protocols. there has also been a published report of a chatbot used in a fake personal ad on a dating service's website. [ 77 ] tay , an ai chatbot designed to learn from previous interaction, caused major controversy due to it being targeted by internet trolls on twitter. soon after its launch, the bot was exploited, and with its "repeat after me" capability, it started releasing racist, sexist, and controversial responses to twitter users. [ 78 ] this suggests that although the bot learned effectively from experience, adequate protection was not put in place to prevent misuse. [ 79 ] if a text-sending algorithm can pass itself off as a human instead of a chatbot, its message would be more credible. therefore, human-seeming chatbots with well-crafted online identities could start scattering fake news that seems plausible, for instance making false claims during an election. with enough chatbots, it might be even possible to achieve artificial social proof . [ 80 ] [ 81 ] data security is one of the major concerns of chatbot technologies. security threats and system vulnerabilities are weaknesses that are often exploited by malicious users. storage of user data and past communication, that is highly valuable for training and development of chatbots, can also give rise to security threats. [ 82 ] chatbots operating on third-party networks may be subject to various security issues if owners of the third-party applications have policies regarding user data that differ from those of the chatbot. [ 82 ] security threats can be reduced or prevented by incorporating protective mechanisms. user authentication , chat end-to-end encryption , and self-destructing messages are some effective solutions to resist potential security threats. [ 82 ] chatbots have shown to be an emerging technology used in the field of mental health. its usage may encourage the users to seek advice on matters of mental health as a means to avoid the stigmatization that may come from sharing such matters with other people. [ 83 ] this is because chatbots can give a sense of privacy and anonymity when sharing sensitive information, as well as providing a space that allows for the user to be free of judgment. [ 83 ] an example of this can be seen in a study which found that with social media and ai chatbots both being possible outlets to express mental health online, users were more willing to share their darker and more depressive emotions to the chatbot. [ 83 ] findings prove that chatbots have great potential in scenarios in which it is difficult for users to reach out to family or friends for support. [ 83 ] it has been noted that it demonstrates the ability to give young people "various types of social support such as appraisal, informational, emotional, and instrumental support". [ 83 ] studies have found that chatbots are able to assist users in managing things such as depression and anxiety. [ 83 ] some examples of chatbots that serve this function are "woebot, wysa, vivibot, and tess". [ 83 ] evidence indicates that when mental health chatbots interact with users, they tend to follow certain conversation flows. [ 84 ] these being guided conversation, semi guided conversation, and open ended conversation. [ 84 ] the most popular, guided conversation, “only allows the users to communicate with the chatbot with predefined responses from the chatbot. it does not allow any form of open input from the users”. [ 84 ] it has also been noted in a study looking at the methods employed by various mental health chatbots, that most of them employed a form of cognitive behavior therapy with the user. [ 84 ] research has identified that there are potential barriers to entry that come with the usage of chatbots for mental health. [ 85 ] there exist ongoing privacy concerns with sharing user’s personal data in chat logs with chatbots. [ 85 ] in addition to that, there exists a lack of willingness from those in lower socioeconomic statuses to adopt interactions with chatbots as a meaningful way to improve upon mental health. [ 85 ] though chatbots may be capable of detecting simple human emotions in interactions with users, they are incapable of replicating the level of empathy that human therapists do. [ 85 ] due to the nature of chatbots being language learning models trained on numerous datasets, the issue of algorithmic bias exists. [ 85 ] chatbots with built in biases from their training can have them brought out against individuals of certain backgrounds and may result incorrect information being conveyed. [ 85 ] there is a lack of research about how exactly these interactions help with a user’s real life. [ 84 ] additionally, there are concerns regarding the safety of users when interacting with such chatbots. [ 84 ] when improvements and advancements are made to such technologies, how that may affect humans is not a priority. [ 84 ] it is possible that this can lead to "unintended negative consequences, such as biases, inadequate and failed responses, and privacy issues". [ 84 ] a risk that may come about because of the usage of chatbots to deal with mental health is increased isolation, as well as a lack of support in times of crisis. [ 84 ] another notable risk is a general lack of a strong understanding of mental health. [ 84 ] studies have indicated that mental health oriented chatbots have been prone to recommending users medical solutions and to rely upon themselves heavily. [ 84 ] chatbots have difficulty managing non-linear conversations that must go back and forth on a topic with a user. [ 86 ] large language models are more versatile, but require a large amount of conversational data to train. these modeles generate new responses word by word based on user input, are usually trained on a large dataset of natural-language phrases. [ 3 ] they sometimes provide plausible-sounding but incorrect or nonsensical answers. they can make up names, dates, historical events, and even simple math problems. [ 87 ] when large language models produce coherent-sounding but inaccurate or fabricated content, this is referred to as " hallucinations ". when humans use and apply chatbot content contaminated with hallucinations, this results in "botshit". [ 88 ] given the increasing adoption and use of chatbots for generating content, there are concerns that this technology will significantly reduce the cost it takes humans to generate misinformation . [ 89 ] chatbots and technology in general used to automate repetitive tasks. but advanced chatbots like chatgpt are also targeting high-paying, creative, and knowledge-based jobs, raising concerns about workforce disruption and quality trade-offs in favor of cost-cutting. [ 90 ] chatbots are increasingly used by small and medium enterprises , to handle customer interactions efficiently, reducing reliance on large call centers and lowering operational costs. [ 91 ] prompt engineering , the task of designing and refining prompts (inputs) leading to desired ai-generated responses has quickly gained significant demand with the advent of large language models, [ 92 ] although the viability of this job is questioned due to new techniques for automating prompt engineering. [ 93 ] generative ai uses a high amount of electric power . due to reliance on fossil fuels in its generation , this increases air pollution , water pollution , and greenhouse gas emissions . in 2023, a question to chatgpt consumed on average 10 times as much energy as a google search. [ 94 ] data centres in general, and those used for ai tasks specifically, consume significant amounts of water for cooling. [ 95 ] [ 96 ]

cynthya karam ( arabic : سينتيا كرم ; born 11 july 1980) is a lebanese actress, singer, and television presenter known for her work in theater, television, and music. a graduate in theater from the lebanese university , she first gained recognition as a contestant on the inaugural season of the pan-arab talent show star academy in 2003. her career spans stage productions such as georges khabbaz 's productions and television roles including adla in bil-damm (2025), which earned critical acclaim. beyond acting, karam is involved in humanitarian initiatives, including volunteer work in children's hospitals. karam was born in beit ed-dine on 11 july 1980. [ 2 ] her father kamal wadih karam, [ 3 ] was a lebanese army general. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] karam's talent began to develop at a young age, encouraged by her mother who fostered a creative and playful environment. her mother would dance, play the piano, and watch musicals with her. [ 6 ] young karam also organized home performances with neighbors, which solidified her passion for the theater. [ 7 ] her early years were marked by the challenges of growing up during the lebanese civil war , [ 8 ] and by her parents' divorce, which she described as having significantly shaped her personal growth and resilience. [ 9 ] [ 10 ] initially enrolled at the lebanese academy of fine arts to study advertising, karam's father suggested she transfers to the lebanese university 's faculty of arts to pursue her passion for theater. [ 11 ] [ 12 ] her mother, who thought of theater as a hobby, did not support her decision. [ 13 ] she eventually relented after witnessing her first stage performance. [ 14 ] karam's career spans across television, theater, and music. she gained initial recognition as a contestant on the first season of star academy in 2003, [ 15 ] [ 16 ] a popular pan-arab televised talent show, and the second reality television show in arab tv history. [ 17 ] in a 2025 interview with lebanese journalist nadya tueini , karam stated that she was unfamiliar with the specifics of the show prior to her participation. [ 18 ] she joined star academy after being recommended by the lebanese composer ousama rahbani . while studying at the lebanese university, rahbani was casting for a production of romeo and juliet and sought actors who could sing and dance. upon learning of karam's talents, he encouraged her to audition for the reality show, though she initially resisted due to her unfamiliarity with arabic music. [ 19 ] in theater, karam has played in various productions; notably, she performed in "hadara" and "nashid" directed by gabriel yammine , "zilal" directed by jihad el andari, [ 20 ] "maamoul" and "ghammed ayn, fatteh ayn" in 2024 written and directed by karim shebli and sara abdo, [ 21 ] and participated in the jordanian theater festival with "ayam raba`iyat al khayyam" directed by jabbar hassan. she also starred in the comedy "matloub" by georges khabbaz . [ 20 ] in 2023 she played the role nancy nar, the arabic counterpart of roxie hart in the arabic rendition of chicago . [ 22 ] karam's television credits include roles in series such as syrian drama "sana'udu baada qalil" (2013), "saqf al-alam" (2007), and "amnesia" (2021). she also appeared in the film "bil kanun" (2014), and damascus under fire" (2018). [ 20 ] karam met writer nadine jaber in theater performance who cast her in the series bil-damm (in the blood) in the role of adla. [ 23 ] karam's portrayal of adla received widespread acclaim from both critics and audiences, especially during adla's tragic death, which was highlighted for its depth and authenticity. viewers expressed strong emotional reactions, with many noting the unexpected nature of the character's fate. [ 24 ] karam's engagement with fans, and her social and humanitarian involvement contributed to her reputation as a socially conscious artist. [ 25 ] [ 2 ] in addition to acting, karam has pursued a career in music. she has performed at various festivals and events alongside fellow "star academy" alumni. [ 15 ] karam, then a volunteer with the lebanese red cross , responded to the 12 december 2005 mkalles bombing , an assassination attack targeting gibran tueni , [ 26 ] a prominent lebanese journalist, politician, and outspoken critic of syria's military and political occupation of lebanon . [ 27 ] initially, she mistook the blast for a factory explosion. arriving at the scene after the detonation, she helped recover and carry tueni's body. [ 26 ] in 2016, karam ran as a candidate for the municipal council of beit ed-dine , though she was not elected. [ 28 ] beyond her artistic career, karam is involved in humanitarian work, volunteering as a clown doctor in hospitals, and caring for cancer and end-of-life patients, including in children's hospitals. [ 2 ]

clown care , also known as hospital clowning , is a program in health care facilities involving visits from specially trained clowns . they are colloquially called "clown doctors" which is a trademarked name in several countries. these visits to hospitals have been shown to help in lifting patients' moods with the positive power of hope and humor . there is also an associated positive benefit to the staff and families of patients. [ 1 ] patch adams , considered the first hospital clown, started being a hospital clown in the 1970s. he was portrayed in the 1998 film patch adams by robin williams , bringing attention to hospital clowning. [ 2 ] professional clown doctors began working in hospitals in 1986 under a program called the big apple circus clown care unit , which was started by michael christensen in new york city . clown doctor programs now operate in every state in australia , new zealand , [ 3 ] the united states , the united kingdom , canada , israel , south africa , hong kong , brazil , belarus , taiwan [ 4 ] and all over europe and in some parts of india . [ 2 ] clown doctors attend specifically to the psycho-social needs of the hospitalized child but in some hospitals they also visit adults. [ 5 ] they parody the hospital routine to help children adapt to their surroundings, they also distract from and demystify painful or frightening procedures. [ 6 ] the atmosphere of fun and laughter can help children forget about the illness and the stress for a moment. clown doctors use techniques such as magic, music, storytelling and other clowning skills to empower children with doses of fun that help them deal with the range of emotions they may experience while in hospital: fear, anxiety, [ 7 ] [ 8 ] loneliness, boredom. according to tan, metsälä, and hannula, [ 9 ] "clown care creates a positive emotional state, promotes interaction between parents and child, and fosters affirmative environmental conditions." research on the physiological health benefits of laughter has been conducted for decades and continues to be carried out by medical physicians internationally. there is also a growing group of researchers that are exploring the psychological benefits of laughter, and specifically the work of clown-doctors. [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ]

wfrv-tv (channel 5) is a television station in green bay, wisconsin , united states, affiliated with cbs . owned by nexstar media group , the station maintains studios on east mason street in green bay and a transmitter north of morrison, wisconsin . wfrv-tv traces its history to wnam-tv, which began broadcasting in january 1954 from studios in neenah . owned by the neenah-menasha broadcasting company, it was the only ultra high frequency (uhf) outlet in northeastern wisconsin at a time when uhf stations faced severe technical and economic handicaps against very high frequency (vhf) stations. at the end of 1954, wnam-tv suspended operations and merged with the valley telecasting company, a consortium of area investors that had obtained the construction permit for channel 5 in green bay. the new station, wfrv-tv, debuted on may 20, 1955, from the former wnam-tv studios in neenah and became owned entirely by neenah-menasha. in january 1957, the station opened its present studios in green bay. originally an affiliate of the abc network, the station switched to nbc in 1959. from 1960 to 1980, wfrv-tv was owned by the morton and norton families of louisville, kentucky , under the aegis of what eventually became known as orion broadcasting . in 1969, the company opened wjmn-tv (channel 3) in escanaba, michigan , which served as a semi-satellite of wfrv for the central upper peninsula of michigan . when orion broadcasting and cosmos broadcasting merged, wfrv and wjmn were divested to midwest radio and television , which owned wcco-tv in minneapolis . midwest switched the station's affiliation back to abc in 1983 and invested in the news department. midwest was acquired by cbs in 1991. this resulted in another affiliation switch in green bay on march 15, 1992, with abc moving to wbay-tv (channel 2). cbs continued to own wfrv-tv until 2007, when it traded the green bay and escanaba stations to liberty media in exchange for shares of its stock. nexstar acquired wfrv and wjmn in 2011. wfrv added several new newscasts and a lifestyle show in the years following the purchase. wjmn was also given more local news programming; that station lost its cbs affiliation in january 2022 and was sold by nexstar in 2024. wnam-tv began telecasting from neenah on ultra high frequency (uhf) channel 42 on january 26, 1954, [ 3 ] after beginning test transmissions in december 1953. [ 4 ] owned by the neenah-menasha broadcasting company alongside radio station wnam (1280 am), wnam-tv carried programming from abc beginning in july 1954. [ 5 ] meanwhile, in april 1952, 17 local businessmen formed the valley telecasting company to apply for channel 6, which had been allocated to green bay. [ 6 ] three months later, the green bay newspaper company, owner of the green bay press-gazette newspaper and radio station wjpg , switched its application to specify channel 6 instead of channel 2. [ 7 ] that switch left the application of wbay-tv uncontested on channel 2, allowing the federal communications commission (fcc) to grant it, and sent channel 6 to a comparative hearing situation. [ 8 ] in december 1953, acting on a petition from the hearst corporation , the fcc moved the channel 6 allocation to whitefish bay , near milwaukee . hearst had applied for a milwaukee tv station but was shut out by the redesignation of channel 10 there for educational use. moving channel 6 to whitefish bay required it to be replaced with channel 5 at green bay and channel 5 at marquette, michigan , to be changed to channel 6. [ 9 ] [ 10 ] on march 10, 1954, the green bay newspaper company withdrew its application for channel 5, [ 11 ] and the fcc granted a construction permit to valley telecasting company the next day. by this time, there was an additional vhf station under construction in the region, wmbv-tv on channel 11. [ 12 ] meanwhile, uhf stations were struggling. wosh-tv of oshkosh closed down the same month; its owners claimed that national and regional advertisers were content with vhf stations to reach the area and cited the forthcoming advent of channels 5 and 11, which together with wbay-tv would provide all three major networks. [ 13 ] sensing that the arrival of valley telecasting—which had selected the call letters wfrv-tv for its station to represent the "wonderful fox river valley" [ 1 ] —would economically harm its uhf station, neenah-menasha agreed to merge with valley telecasting in november [ 14 ] and announced it would suspend operations of wnam-tv on the evening of january 2, 1955. [ 15 ] the combined station would retain some operations at neenah for program production in the fox cities , but it would use the tower and transmitter building of the former wjpg-fm on scray's hill near de pere . [ 14 ] wfrv-tv signed on channel 5 on may 20, 1955, after an appeal lodged by wmbv-tv to block the merger of valley telecasting and neenah-menasha was declined for the final time; the station aired film programming for its first ten days before beginning affiliations with abc and dumont television network on june 1. [ 16 ] while the transmitter facility was new, wfrv-tv used wnam-tv's neenah studios. [ 16 ] dumont ceased network operations four months later. [ 17 ] by 1956, neenah-menasha owned all of wfrv-tv; [ 18 ] that same year, the company announced plans to build a studio base in green bay. [ 19 ] master control switched to green bay in december when a new tower and transmitter building were activated, and production from the station's present mason street studios began in mid-january 1957. [ 20 ] wfrv-tv was the green bay station in the short-lived badger television network , which operated in 1958 and also included milwaukee 's wisn-tv and madison 's wkow-tv . [ 21 ] the next year, on february 1, the station changed affiliations from abc to nbc. [ 22 ] later that year, the station claimed to be the first ever to show coverage of a live lunar eclipse. to capture the event, a studio camera was wheeled out into the station parking lot. [ 23 ] in december 1960, valley telecasting sold wfrv-tv to valley broadcasting company, a subsidiary of wave-tv at louisville, kentucky , for $1.09 million. [ 24 ] wfrv's first attempt at expanding to the upper peninsula, a construction permit to build channel 8 at iron mountain, michigan , was scrapped at the company's request days after the sale, as was an application by the company to build a channel 9 station at wausau . [ 25 ] channel 5 began to broadcast local programming in color in the fall of 1965, making it the second station (behind wbay-tv) with that capability in the market. [ 26 ] two years later, the station began its move to build a satellite in the upper peninsula when it filed for channel 3 at escanaba, michigan , on june 20, 1967. [ 27 ] as a result of an attempt by northern michigan university to build an educational station on the wider-coverage channel 3 instead of the allocated channel 13, nearly two years passed before a construction permit was granted on april 23, 1969. [ 28 ] from a transmitter site near trenary , wjmn-tv —so designated in honor of jane morton norton, chairman of the board of the company [ 29 ] —began broadcasting october 7, bringing a full nbc lineup and wfrv-tv's signal to a further 50,000 households. [ 30 ] that same year, wave, inc. renamed itself orion broadcasting in reflection of its broadcasting holdings beyond louisville. [ 31 ] orion broadcasting reached a deal to merge with cosmos broadcasting, a subsidiary of the liberty corporation , in 1980. the merger would put the combined company over the limit for the number of vhf television stations it could own, prompting it to immediately announce that it would divest wfrv/wjmn. [ 32 ] in january 1981, cosmos found a buyer: midwest radio-television , owners of wcco radio and television in minneapolis . [ 33 ] the transaction closed in october. [ 34 ] after taking over, midwest made $1 million in major investments in new equipment, including a news helicopter. [ 35 ] on october 25, 1982, the station announced it would end its 23-year association with nbc and return to the then-stronger abc in 1983, after abc began courting channel 5, which had been one of nbc's strongest affiliates. [ 36 ] one potential complication emerged when it was discovered that wfrv's affiliation agreement had just been automatically renewed through february 1985. [ 37 ] it was not until march 1983 that outgoing abc outlet wluk-tv and nbc reached an affiliation deal, which allowed the switch to take place on april 18. [ 38 ] on july 23, 1991, cbs announced that it would purchase the entirety of midwest communications, inc. the deal gave the company wcco radio and television in minneapolis, but it also gave cbs an abc affiliate—wfrv/wjmn—in a market smaller than any in which the company was operating. [ 39 ] in the immediate aftermath of the $200 million acquisition, the network sent out mixed messages: cbs executive peter lund said the company had decided to keep the green bay station, yet an affiliate relations official told longtime cbs affiliate wbay-tv that the network would be interested in remaining there if a buyer were to be found. [ 39 ] the sale dislodged the existing cbs affiliates in the green bay and marquette markets, wbay-tv and wluc-tv . the switch in green bay took place march 15, 1992—just over a month after cbs closed on the midwest purchase—with wbay becoming the abc outlet. [ 40 ] in marquette, where cbs angered wluc-tv by notifying it on february 5 that it was terminating the affiliation agreement in july, that station switched to abc on february 23, prompting wjmn to change to cbs three weeks early (and be fed cbs programs from the control room in green bay). [ 41 ] wfrv was unaffected by the 1995 switch that saw wluk-tv and wgba-tv swap affiliations. the station was the first in green bay to launch a digital television signal, in 2002. [ 23 ] in april 2007, liberty media (a media company unrelated to the liberty corporation and a spin-off of former cable television company tci ) completed an exchange transaction with cbs corporation pursuant to which liberty media exchanged 7.6 million shares of cbs class b common stock valued at $239 million for a subsidiary of cbs that held wfrv and wjmn and approximately $170 million in cash [ 42 ] as part of the transaction, liberty media acquired wfrv and wjmn, becoming the only over-the-air television properties to be owned by the company. [ 43 ] wfrv-tv shut down its analog signal, over vhf channel 5, on february 17, 2009, the original target date on which full-power television stations in the united states were to transition from analog to digital broadcasts under federal mandate (which was later pushed back to june 12, 2009). [ 44 ] the station's digital signal remained on its pre-transition uhf channel 39, using virtual channel 5. [ 45 ] on april 7, 2011, nexstar broadcasting group announced it would acquire wfrv and wjmn-tv from liberty media for $20 million. [ 46 ] the deal was approved by the fcc on june 28, 2011, [ 47 ] and closed three days later on july 1, when nexstar tapped joseph denk to become vice president and general manager of both stations. [ 48 ] denk replaced perry kidder, a 37-year employee of the station, who announced his retirement shortly after the sale was announced. [ 49 ] nexstar also relaunched the station's website at a new domain, "wearegreenbay.com". [ 50 ] nexstar also moved to increase the local content of wjmn in the upper peninsula. a station that had long merely rebroadcast wfrv-tv's newscasts or maintained a minimal reporting and weather presence in northern michigan, wjmn launched separate local newscasts at 6 and 11 p.m. on march 13, 2014. [ 51 ] at that time, it branded as "local 3", [ 51 ] matching wfrv, which had taken on the "local 5" moniker in 2012. [ 52 ] on january 27, 2016, media general announced that it had entered into a definitive agreement to be acquired by nexstar. [ 53 ] [ 54 ] because media general owned wbay, the new company was required to sell that station or wfrv to another owner. on june 3, nexstar announced it had opted to keep wfrv and would sell wbay along with another merger divestiture, kwqc-tv in davenport, iowa , to gray television for $270 million. [ 55 ] [ 56 ] in 2022, wjmn lost its cbs affiliation in the marquette market to wzmq (channel 19) and replaced the lost cbs programs with programming from mynetworktv as well as nexstar-owned diginets antenna tv and rewind tv , to fill time where cbs programming formerly resided. the station also extended its existing 6 p.m. newscast to one hour and moved its 11 p.m. newscast to 10 p.m. [ 57 ] [ 58 ] nexstar sold wjmn-tv to sullivan's landing, llc in 2024; the new owner contracted with morgan murphy media , owner of marquette-market abc affiliate wbup , which led to that company combining the two stations' operations and newsrooms. [ 59 ] wfrv has typically been the second- or third-rated station for local news in the green bay market, which is usually led by wbay-tv. [ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] in the early 1980s, wfrv was the first local station to start a full news bureau in the fox cities area, which at the time accounted for a third of the newsroom budget. where the original news bureau was in the reporter's apartment, by 1983 the station had dedicated facilities, including a microwave link for sending stories back to green bay. [ 63 ] in 2004, the station moved its fox valley facility to a site on patriot drive in little chute , equidistant from downtown appleton and downtown green bay, and equipped it with the area's only doppler weather radar . [ 64 ] on june 23, 2011, after a six-month upgrade process, wfrv became the first station in the green bay market to begin broadcasting its local newscasts in high definition ; the changeover to hd included upgraded weather systems, including real-time street-level radar. [ 65 ] [ 66 ] beginning in september 2012, wfrv greatly expanded its local news output, including the addition of an hour-long afternoon newscast at 4 p.m. and the expansion of its 6 p.m. newscast from 30 minutes to one hour; the 6 p.m. newscast was reduced to 30 minutes during the national football league (nfl) season on nights when wfrv aired packers-related programming. [ 67 ] [ 68 ] the station launched an hour-long local mid-morning program, local 5 live! , in 2013. [ 69 ] wfrv has historically been a major producer of programming around the green bay packers . in 1988, the station hired former packers center larry mccarren to serve as a sportscaster. [ 70 ] by 1990, mccarren was hosting a weekly program on the team, packers locker room . [ 71 ] mccarren was elevated to sports director when he signed a new long-term contract with channel 5 in 1994; this came even as cbs lost nfl rights. [ 72 ] in 2003, wfrv acquired the rights to preseason telecasts, which had belonged locally to wbay-tv for some 40 years; mccarren appeared on the telecasts. [ 73 ] after the packers left wfrv for a deal with wgba-tv (and a renewal with milwaukee's wtmj-tv ) in 2012, [ 74 ] mccarren soon followed; he resigned his duties as sports director of wfrv to move to wtmj/wgba as a packers analyst, becoming wgba's official sports director on april 1, 2013. [ 75 ] [ 76 ] mccarren left wgba in 2015 and became a team employee. [ 77 ] wfrv gradually added several diginets to its lineup in the 2010s. bounce tv was added in 2016 as part of a group deal made with katz broadcasting , [ 83 ] [ 84 ] while true crime network debuted in april 2020. [ 85 ]

a lunar eclipse is an astronomical event that occurs when the moon moves into the earth's shadow , causing the moon to be darkened. [ 1 ] such an alignment occurs during an eclipse season , approximately every six months, during the full moon phase, when the moon's orbital plane is closest to the plane of the earth's orbit . this can occur only when the sun , earth, and moon are exactly or very closely aligned (in syzygy ) with earth between the other two, which can happen only on the night of a full moon when the moon is near either lunar node . the type and length of a lunar eclipse depend on the moon's proximity to the lunar node. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] when the moon is totally eclipsed by the earth (a "deep eclipse"), [ 4 ] [ 5 ] it takes on a reddish color that is caused by the planet when it completely blocks direct sunlight from reaching the moon's surface, as the only light that is reflected from the lunar surface is what has been refracted by the earth's atmosphere . this light appears reddish due to the rayleigh scattering of blue light, the same reason sunrises and sunsets are more orange than during the day. unlike a solar eclipse , which can only be viewed from a relatively small area of the world, a lunar eclipse may be viewed from anywhere on the night side of earth. a total lunar eclipse can last up to nearly two hours (while a total solar eclipse lasts only a few minutes at any given place) because the moon's shadow is smaller. also unlike solar eclipses, lunar eclipses are safe to view without any eye protection or special precautions. the symbol for a lunar eclipse (or any body in the shadow of another) is (u+1f776 🝶). earth's shadow can be divided into two distinctive parts: the umbra and penumbra . [ 6 ] earth totally occludes direct solar radiation within the umbra, the central region of the shadow. however, since the sun's diameter appears to be about one-quarter of earth's in the lunar sky , the planet only partially blocks direct sunlight within the penumbra, the outer portion of the shadow. a penumbral lunar eclipse occurs when part or all of the moon's near side passes into the earth's penumbra. [ 7 ] no part of the moon is in the earth's umbra during this event, meaning that on all or a part of the moon's surface facing earth, the sun is partially blocked. the penumbra causes a subtle dimming of the lunar surface, which is only visible to the naked eye when the majority of the moon's diameter has immersed into earth's penumbra. [ 8 ] a special type of penumbral eclipse is a total penumbral lunar eclipse , during which the entire moon lies exclusively within earth's penumbra. total penumbral eclipses are rare, and when these occur, the portion of the moon closest to the umbra may appear slightly darker than the rest of the lunar disk. when the moon's near side penetrates partially into the earth's umbra, it is known as a partial lunar eclipse, [ 7 ] while a total lunar eclipse occurs when the entire moon enters the earth's umbra. during this event, one part of the moon is in the earth's umbra, while the other part is in the earth's penumbra. the moon's average orbital speed is about 1.03 km/s (2,300 mph), or a little more than its diameter per hour, so totality may last up to nearly 107 minutes. nevertheless, the total time between the first and last contacts of the moon's limb with earth's shadow is much longer and could last up to 236 minutes. [ 9 ] when the moon's near side entirely passes into the earth's umbral shadow, a total lunar eclipse occurs. [ 7 ] just prior to complete entry, the brightness of the lunar limb—the curved edge of the moon still being hit by direct sunlight—will cause the rest of the moon to appear comparatively dim. the moment the moon enters a complete eclipse, the entire surface will become more or less uniformly bright, being able to reveal stars surrounding it. later, as the moon's opposite limb is struck by sunlight, the overall disk will again become obscured. this is because, as viewed from the earth, the brightness of a lunar limb is generally greater than that of the rest of the surface due to reflections from the many surface irregularities within the limb: sunlight striking these irregularities is always reflected back in greater quantities than that striking more central parts, which is why the edges of full moons generally appear brighter than the rest of the lunar surface. this is similar to the effect of velvet fabric over a convex curved surface, which, to an observer, will appear darkest at the center of the curve. it will be true of any planetary body with little or no atmosphere and an irregular cratered surface (e.g., mercury) when viewed opposite the sun. [ 10 ] central lunar eclipse is a total lunar eclipse during which the moon passes near and through the centre of earth's shadow, contacting the antisolar point . [ 11 ] this type of lunar eclipse is relatively rare . the relative distance of the moon from earth at the time of an eclipse can affect the eclipse's duration. in particular, when the moon is near apogee , the farthest point from earth in its orbit , its orbital speed is the slowest. the diameter of earth's umbra does not decrease appreciably within the changes in the moon's orbital distance. thus, the concurrence of a totally eclipsed moon near apogee will lengthen the duration of totality. a selenelion or selenehelion , also called a horizontal eclipse , occurs where and when both the sun and an eclipsed moon can be observed at the same time. the event can only be observed just before sunset or just after sunrise , when both bodies will appear just above opposite horizons at nearly opposite points in the sky. a selenelion occurs during every total lunar eclipse—it is an experience of the observer , not a planetary event separate from the lunar eclipse itself. typically, observers on earth located on high mountain ridges undergoing false sunrise or false sunset at the same moment of a total lunar eclipse will be able to experience it. although during selenelion the moon is completely within the earth's umbra, both it and the sun can be observed in the sky because atmospheric refraction causes each body to appear higher (i.e., more central) in the sky than its true geometric planetary position. [ 13 ] the timing of total lunar eclipses is determined by what are known as its "contacts" (moments of contact with earth's shadow): [ 14 ] the following scale (the danjon scale ) was devised by andré danjon for rating the overall darkness of lunar eclipses: [ 15 ] there is often confusion between a solar eclipse and a lunar eclipse. while both involve interactions between the sun, earth, and the moon, they are very different in their interactions. the moon does not completely darken as it passes through the umbra because of the refraction of sunlight by earth's atmosphere into the shadow cone; if earth had no atmosphere, the moon would be completely dark during the eclipse. [ 16 ] the reddish coloration arises because sunlight reaching the moon must pass through a long and dense layer of earth's atmosphere, where it is scattered . shorter wavelengths are more likely to be scattered by the air molecules and small particles ; thus, the longer wavelengths predominate by the time the light rays have penetrated the atmosphere. human vision perceives this resulting light as red . this is the same effect that causes sunsets and sunrises to turn the sky a reddish color. an alternative way of conceiving this scenario is to realize that, as viewed from the moon, the sun would appear to be setting (or rising) behind earth. the amount of refracted light depends on the amount of dust or clouds in the atmosphere; this also controls how much light is scattered. in general, the dustier the atmosphere, the more that other wavelengths of light will be removed (compared to red light), leaving the resulting light a deeper red color. this causes the resulting coppery-red hue of the moon to vary from one eclipse to the next. volcanoes are notable for expelling large quantities of dust into the atmosphere, and a large eruption shortly before an eclipse can have a large effect on the resulting color. several cultures have myths related to lunar eclipses or allude to the lunar eclipse as being a good or bad omen . the egyptians saw the eclipse as a sow swallowing the moon for a short time; other cultures view the eclipse as the moon being swallowed by other animals, such as a jaguar in mayan tradition, or a mythical three-legged toad known as chan chu in china . [ citation needed ] some societies thought it was a demon swallowing the moon, and that they could chase it away by throwing stones and curses at it. [ 17 ] the ancient greeks correctly believed the earth was round and used the shadow from the lunar eclipse as evidence. [ 18 ] some hindus believe in the importance of bathing in the ganges river following an eclipse because it will help to achieve salvation . [ 19 ] similarly to the mayans, the incans believed that lunar eclipses occurred when a jaguar ate the moon, which is why a blood moon looks red. the incans also believed that once the jaguar finished eating the moon, it could come down and devour all the animals on earth, so they would take spears and shout at the moon to keep it away. [ 20 ] the ancient mesopotamians believed that a lunar eclipse was when the moon was being attacked by seven demons. this attack was more than just one on the moon, however, for the mesopotamians linked what happened in the sky with what happened on the land, and because the king of mesopotamia represented the land, the seven demons were thought to be also attacking the king. in order to prevent this attack on the king, the mesopotamians made someone pretend to be the king so they would be attacked instead of the true king. after the lunar eclipse was over, the substitute king was made to disappear (possibly by poisoning ). [ 20 ] in some chinese cultures, people would ring bells to prevent a dragon or other wild animals from biting the moon. [ 21 ] in the 19th century, during a lunar eclipse, the chinese navy fired its artillery because of this belief. [ 22 ] during the zhou dynasty ( c. 1046–256 bc) in the book of songs , the sight of a red moon engulfed in darkness was believed to foreshadow famine or disease. [ 23 ] certain lunar eclipses have been referred to as "blood moons" in popular articles but this is not a scientifically recognized term. [ 24 ] this term has been given two separate, but overlapping, meanings. the meaning usually relates to the reddish color a totally eclipsed moon takes on to observers on earth. [ 25 ] as sunlight penetrates the atmosphere of earth , the gaseous layer filters and refracts the rays in such a way that the green to violet wavelengths on the visible spectrum scatter more strongly than the red, thus giving the moon a reddish cast. [ 26 ] this is possible because the rays from the sun are able to wrap around the earth and reflect off the moon. [ 27 ] at least two lunar eclipses and as many as five occur every year, although total lunar eclipses are significantly less common than partial lunar eclipses. if the date and time of an eclipse is known, the occurrences of upcoming eclipses are predictable using an eclipse cycle , like the saros . eclipses occur only during an eclipse season , when the sun appears to pass near either node of the moon's orbit . a lunar eclipse is on the moon a solar eclipse . the occurrence makes earth's atmosphere appear as a red ring around the dark earth. during full moon, the phase when lunar eclipses take place, the dark side of the earth is illuminated by the moon and its moon light .

khujand [ a ] , sometimes spelled khodjent and formerly known as leninabad [ b ] from 1936 to 1991, is the second-largest city of tajikistan and the capital of tajikistan's northernmost sughd province. khujand is one of the oldest cities in central asia , dating back about 2,500 years to the persian empire . situated on the syr darya river at the mouth of the fergana valley , khujand was a major city along the ancient silk road . after being captured by alexander the great in 329 bc, it was renamed alexandria eschate and has since been part of various empires in history, including the umayyad caliphate (8th century), the mongol empire (13th century) and the russian empire (19th century). [ 3 ] today, the majority of its population are ethnic tajiks and the city is close to the present borders of both uzbekistan and kyrgyzstan . khujand may have been the site of cyropolis ( κυρούπολις ) which was established when king cyrus the great founded the city during his last expedition against the saka tribe of massagetae shortly before his death. alexander the great later built his furthest greek settlement near cyropolis in 329 bc and named it alexandria eschate ( greek : ἀλεξάνδρεια ἐσχάτη) or "alexandria the furthest". [ 4 ] the city would form a bastion for the greek settlers against the nomadic scythian tribes who lived north of the syr darya river. according to the roman writer curtius , alexandria ultima (alexandria the furthest) retained its hellenistic culture as late as 30 bc. the city became a major staging point on the northern silk road . [ 5 ] it also became a cultural hub, and several famous poets and scientists came from this city. the sheik muslihiddin mausoleum and jami masjidi yami mosque, together with the fortress of khujand, which was built over 2,500 years ago and underwent several stages of destruction and renovation, were preserved by khujand, as were some monuments from the 16th–17th century. [ 6 ] in the early eighth century ad, khujand was captured by the forces of the umayyad caliphate , under qutayba ibn muslim . the city was incorporated into the umayyad and subsequent abbasid caliphates , and a process of islamicization began. in the late ninth century, however, it reverted to local rule and was incorporated into the samanid empire . it came under the rule of the kara-khanid khanate in 999 and after the division of kara khanids in 1042, it was initially part of eastern kara khanids, and then later passed to the western one. molana wajeeh-ud-din khujandi was a muslim scholar of khujand who migrated to dilli. hafiz khawaja sheikh mehmood (moena doz) was his nephew. his daughter bibi qursam khatoon was mother of baba fareed ud din ganj e shakr. karakhitans conquered it in 1137, but it passed to khwarazmshahs in 1211. in 1220, it strongly resisted the mongol hordes and was thus laid to waste. in the 14th century, the city was part of the chagatai khanate until it was incorporated into the timurid dynasty in the late 14th century, under which it flourished greatly. the shaybanid dynasty of bukhara next annexed khujand, until it was taken over by the kokand khanate in 1802, however, bukhara regained it in 1842 until it was lost a few decades later to russia. in 1866, as most of central asia was occupied by russian empire , the city became part of the general governorate of turkestan , under tsarist russia. the threat of forced conscription during world war i led to protests in the city in july 1916, which turned violent when demonstrators attacked russian soldiers. [ 7 ] during the initial period of soviet power in central asia, khujand was part of the turkestan assr that was created in 1918. when the latter was dismantled in 1924 on the principle of national delimitation , the city became a part of the uzbek soviet socialist republic . in 1929, the previously created tajik autonomous soviet socialist republic (contained within the uzbek ssr) was upgraded to union-level republic as the tajik soviet socialist republic , and in order to gain a sufficient number of inhabitants (preferably from the titular ethnic group) the city of khujand and the surrounding area, inhabited mainly by ethnic tajiks , was transferred by soviets from the uzbek ssr to the tajik ssr. the city was renamed leninabad (in honour of vladimir lenin) on 10 january 1936 [ 8 ] and it remained part of the soviet union until 1991. now a part of the tajik ssr, leninabad became the second-largest city in the republic, though the city's location within the historically more urban, prosperous, and commercially central fergana valley and a long history of being a densely populated urban centre meant that khujand and its region were sometimes viewed as more developed and cosmopolitan than the newly designated capital and boom-town of dushanbe /stalinabad (the latter was a small town of 6,000 when the tajik ssr was created in 1926 and had reached over 200,000 inhabitants ten years later). [ 9 ] it reverted to its original name in 1992 after the breakup of the soviet union and the independence of tajikistan, and the city continued to be the second-largest city in the nation. in 1996 the city experienced the ashurov protests during which citizens called for the president, emomali rakhmonov , to step down. the popular protests were followed by a protest from the city's prisoners, many of whom had been sentenced to long jail terms for minor crimes and who were living in poor conditions. the protest led to the khujand prison riot in which between 24 and 150 prisoners were killed. in the early 2000s many residents of khujand had little to no access to water, and what water they did have was unsafe to drink and had to be boiled. in 2004, the swiss state secretariat for economic affairs and the european bank of reconstruction and development joined to help improve the situation, providing 32,000 water meters for inhabitants and developing improved access to water. residents pay for their water supply, which in turn helps khujand's municipal water company to continue to renovate and improve their services. the project is in its third stage of development and was to be completed by 2017. in comparison to other central asian projects aiming to improve access to water, this project is considered a success and has been applied to kyrgyz cities and towns such as osh , jalal-abad , karabalta , and talas , with a possible extension into the kyrgyz capital of bishkek . [ 10 ] on 3 september 2010, a suicide attack was committed in the city by the al-qaeda linked jamaat ansarullah militant group, resulting in the deaths of 4 people. [ 11 ] [ 12 ] in april 2017, pastor bakhrom kholmatov was detained after a raid on sunmin sunbogym protestant church in khujand. kholmatov was accused of singing too loudly and "interfering with the comfort and rest" of people who lived nearby, and jailed for three years. [ 13 ] [ better source needed ] khujand airport has regularly scheduled flights to dushanbe as well as several cities in russia. there is also a rail connection between khujand and samarkand in uzbekistan on the way to dushanbe . [ 14 ] [ 15 ] the city is connected by road to panjakent in the zeravshan river valley as well as dushanbe via the anzob tunnel . the 5-km tunnel, located 80 km northwest of dushanbe and built with assistance from iran, is also a transit route between dushanbe and the uzbek capital of tashkent . previously, particularly during cold seasons, the lack of a direct link between northern and southern tajikistan often led to disruptions of commercial activities in the region. [ 16 ] the city is home to khujand state university , tajikistan state university of law, business, & politics , polytechnical institute of technical university of tajikistan , and khujand medical college as well as 2-year technical colleges. secondary education is funded by the state except when administered at private institutions. higher education in universities and colleges is subsidized by the tajik ministry of education . khujand is mainly inhabited by ethnic tajiks . results of population census carried out in 2010: tajiks – 84%, uzbeks – 14%, russians – 0.4%, and others – 1.6%. sunni islam is a mainly practiced religion in the city. [ 8 ] the population of the city is 181,600 (report of statistical agency 2019). [ 8 ] the population in khujand agglomeration is 931,900 people (2019). the city is home to the historical museum of sughd located within the khujand fortress and having around 1200 exhibitions with most being open to the public. [ 17 ] the sheikh muslihiddin mausoleum is located on the main square across the panjshanbe market (бозори панҷшанбе / persian for "thursday's market"), one of the largest covered markets in central asia. [ 18 ] khujand experiences a temperate semi-arid climate ( köppen climate classification bsk ) with cold, snowy winters and hot, dry summers. precipitation is light, and it generally falls in winter and autumn.

the siege of khujand (17–24 may 1866) was part of an unapproved russian military operation during the russian conquest of bukhara and russo-kokand war [ ru ] . the operation was led by military governor dmitry romanovsky [ ru ] and aimed to capture several settlements on the russo-bukharan border including khujand . khujand was a historically autonomous city, and had asserted independence from the emirate of bukhara several months before the siege. after the city was sieged and bombarded, a faction within khujand began to negotiate for peace with russian forces, though they were soon imprisoned by city leaders. russian high command subsequently prepared to take the city via assault. after several more days of bombardment, a final assault began on may 24. despite strong initial resistance, russian forces were able to enter the city from multiple routes. active fighting had ended by midnight, and a formal surrender was delivered on june 5. while russian forces suffered minimal casualties, an estimated 2,500 khujandis were killed in the fighting. the city of khujand was historically contested between the khanate of kokand and the emirate of bukhara (two islamic states located in central asia ). in practice, the city held extreme autonomy from both states, hosting both independent powers of governance, and a corresponding local identity and patriotism . [ 2 ] [ 4 ] in 1865 it was seized by bukhara after kokand's defeat at tashkent to the russian empire , but only a year later khujand would assert full independence after the fall of irjar [ ru ] to russian forces. the city operated an independent garrison under the command of kereuchei mullah tuichi dadkhwah. by the time of the russian attack on khujand, it was still an independent polity . [ 5 ] in the mid-1800s, russia conquered territory in central asia to establish a secure, productive border region with the central asian states to the south. while this territory was secured by 1865, in 1866 war reignited with the neighboring bukhara after several disputes including the detaining of the russian embassy . military governor of orenburg dmitry romanovsky [ ru ] was given tacit permission to attack the bukharan fort of irjar, resulting in a crushing defeat for the bukharans. [ 6 ] romanovsky was subsequently faced with the choice of which direction to continue his attack. he could either continue into bukhara via ura-tyube , jizzakh and samarkand , or capture the frontier cities on the syr darya river via khujand. while the syr darya route was believed by russian command to be an easier attack, it would almost certainly destabilize the russo-bukharan border. romanovsky chose the syr darya route despite this concern, and in a letter to general governor of orenburg nikolay kryzhanovsky [ ru ] downplayed any negative consequences. he would then proceed along the route without kryzhanovsky's authorization. on may 14, 1866, russian troops departed and captured nau fortress, [ 7 ] which romanovsky considered highly strategic due to its placement on the main road between kokand and bukhara. [ 2 ] on may 17, russian forces would depart nau, soon arriving at khujand. [ 7 ] russian forces stopped 3.3 miles (5.3 km) from the city on the bank of the syr darya river. reconnaissance was carried out on the fort, revealing that it would be extremely difficult to take. structures and trees outside the fortress walls had been destroyed to reduce cover, and the main road to the city had been flooded by irrigation canals. [ 7 ] [ 8 ] the city itself was protected by two layers of wall, reinforced with towers, embankments, and barbettes . [ 9 ] [ 8 ] as a result, russian forces decided to attempt diplomacy before any offensive measures were taken. however, russian envoys were shot at when they attempted to approach the city, and plans for diplomatic resolution were abandoned. [ 7 ] [ 8 ] after arriving at khujand, romanovsky received a letter from kryzhanovsky, reprimanding him for requesting materiel for the expedition. due to a recent order to regional quartermasters , funds were strictly prohibited from being spent without being specifically allocated beforehand. since romanovsky had not designated funds for the expedition, no further money or resources could be provided to his expedition. romanovsky's aide-de-camp , who had remained in tashkent , was forced to borrow 3,000 rubles from a wealthy tashkenti to fund the last transport to khujand. [ 10 ] russian forces conducted a second reconnaissance expedition on may 18, one column approaching the city on the left bank of the syr darya, and another column approaching from the right. the columns were fired upon by khujand forces with artillery and small arms, though they were still able to successfully identify a weak section in the north-eastern walls, and encircle the city. [ 7 ] [ 11 ] while russian sources claim that during this time kokandi military parties were approaching the city and agitating local villagers, historian inomjon mamadaliev has cast doubt on this due to the deep hostilities between kokand and khujand. [ 7 ] during the nights of may 19 and may 20, russian forces constructed four batteries consisting of eighteen cannons and two mortars . these batteries then bombarded the city for a day straight, causing general turmoil. [ 12 ] [ 11 ] [ 13 ] several isolated fires also broke out, but did not spread. [ 14 ] as a result of the attack, khujandis split into two factions, a more powerful one led by the two chief jurists and the influential figure khwaja 'azamat who supported negotiation, and a weaker faction led by the aqsaqal (elders) who supported violent resistance. [ 2 ] [ 12 ] [ 11 ] on may 21 at 3:00 a.m, russian forces began an assault on the city, but were stopped outside the walls by a khujandi delegation led by 'azamat. 'azamat promised romanovsky that the city would peacefully surrender, before he returned to the city. upon returning to khujand, he and the chief jurists were arrested by the aqsaqal, and no attempt for peace was made. at noon the following day, the deadline for a formal surrender expired. romanovsky subsequently ordered a heavy artillery bombardment which lasted until may 24. [ 12 ] [ 11 ] [ 13 ] because the halted assault had revealed russian plans, a diversionary attack was launched on the southern side of the city on may 23. this drew defenders away from where the true attack was to be launched, and allowed russian forces to fully cut off road access into the city. [ 11 ] for the final assault on may 24, troops were split into three columns, two under rotmistr baranov and kapitan mikhailov containing two infantry companies and four artillery pieces, and one under major nazarov containing two infantry companies and one hundred cossack cavalry serving as a support reserve. at dawn, the three columns managed to advance through surrounding gardens to their assigned positions without alerting khujandi defenders. captain mikhailov's column was able to construct a battery 900 feet (270 m) away from the gate, which partially demolished the walls. at 2:00 p.m the artillery barrage ended. soon after mikhailov gave a battle cry , signaling the start of the assault. [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] mikhailov's column advanced through a breach in the north-eastern wall, baranov's column attacked the north-eastern qala-yinau and kokand gates, and nazarov's column hid in a mosque near the qala-yinau gate. a company in mikhailov's column attempted to scale the walls with three siege ladders, though were repulsed when defenders began to shoot and throw stones at the attackers. [ 18 ] [ 17 ] the construction of the siege ladders also hindered the attack. all three were overly short and narrow, one being so short it was unable to hook onto the walls. [ 19 ] [ 20 ] during the assault, mikhailov sustained a severe head injury, and he would surrender command to captain bergbaum. [ 18 ] [ 21 ] after dispersing defenders with a barrage of grapeshot , the column successfully scaled and occupied the north-eastern wall, before descending into the city. [ 19 ] baranov's column met similar resistance, but were able to successfully scale the walls and occupy the qala-yinau gate. upon opening the gate, the rest of baranov's column followed by nazarov's column, a reserve force of cossack cavalry, and the remaining infantry under romanovsky entered the city and marched to the citadel . [ 18 ] [ 22 ] soon after, a force under colonel kraevsky sailed a barge to the city's riverine wall, and scaled into the city. [ 21 ] [ 13 ] khujandi forces continued to fight, establishing artillery barricades in the streets and sniping at russian soldiers from buildings. by 7:00 p.m, fighting had significantly lessened, and by midnight the city was silent. many khujandis attempted to flee the city on horseback, though a significant portion were killed or wounded by soldiers romanovsky had ordered to guard the roads. [ 23 ] by the end of the fighting, russian casualties were 5 killed, 65 wounded, 57 to 65 contused, and 6 missing. [ 2 ] [ 1 ] [ a ] romanovsky estimated the total khujandi deaths to be over 2,500, including garrison commander kereuchei mullah tuichi dadkhwah, who romanovsky said was killed while fleeing the city. russian forces began to bury the khujandi dead, and provide rudimentary treatment for the wounded over several days. on june 5, defenders would formally surrender by presenting a traditional khujandi offering of bread and salt to russian command. [ 1 ] soon after the capture of khujand, a delegation representing the emir of bukhara muzaffar bin nasrullah would meet with romanovsky to discuss terms of surrender. romanovky declined this offer, as he considered the leader of the delegation to be an untrustworthy individual. [ 2 ] romanovsky would continue his march to the bukharan cities of jizzakh [ ru ] and ura-tyube [ ru ] . while he had expected to impress the russian government with the unapproved expedition similarly to mikhail chernyayev 's capture of tashkent , the ministry of foreign affairs did not view the action positively. [ 1 ] the captures of fort nau and khujand during romanovsky's expedition intimidated the kokand khanate, which viewed khujand as part of their state. on may 28, khudayar khan delivered a letter to romanovsky in which he declared himself a friend of the tsar, wished for goodwill, and indicated openness to an alliance against bukhara. romanovsky responded positively to the letter, and responded by demanding extradition rights and free trade for russian merchants. [ 24 ]

prince louis of wales ( / ˈ l uː i / loo -ee ; [ 1 ] louis arthur charles; born 23 april 2018) is a member of the british royal family . he is the third and youngest child of william, prince of wales , and catherine, princess of wales , and a grandson of charles iii and diana, princess of wales . he is fourth in the line of succession to the british throne . prince louis was born at 11:01 bst on 23 april 2018 in st mary's hospital, london , during the reign of his paternal great-grandmother, queen elizabeth ii , as the third child and second son of prince william and catherine , then known as duke and duchess of cambridge. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] his birth was marked by gun salutes and bell ringings. [ 5 ] on 27 april, his name was announced as louis arthur charles, [ 6 ] honouring his paternal grandfather, charles, prince of wales (later king charles iii), and his 3rd-great-uncle louis, earl mountbatten of burma . [ 7 ] louis was christened on 9 july by the archbishop of canterbury , justin welby , in the chapel royal at st james's palace . [ 8 ] louis and his family lived at kensington palace and anmer hall during his early childhood. [ 9 ] [ 10 ] he made his trooping the colour debut in 2019. [ 11 ] he started at willcocks nursery school near kensington palace in april 2021. [ 9 ] the family relocated to adelaide cottage in windsor home park in 2022, [ 12 ] after which he started attending lambrook , an independent preparatory school in berkshire , along with his older siblings, prince george and princess charlotte . [ 13 ] [ 14 ] louis also accompanied his siblings and parents for elizabeth ii's platinum jubilee celebrations. [ 15 ] elizabeth ii died on 8 september 2022 and louis's grandfather became king. accordingly, louis became fourth in line to the throne. [ 16 ] [ 17 ] he accompanied his parents and elder siblings to his grandfather's coronation on 6 may 2023. [ 18 ] louis is a british prince with the official style and title "his royal highness prince louis of wales". [ 19 ] before his father was created prince of wales on 9 september 2022, louis was styled "his royal highness prince louis of cambridge". [ 1 ] louis is fourth in the line of succession to the british throne , behind his father and two elder siblings, george and charlotte. [ 2 ] following the implementation of the perth agreement , which replaced male-preference primogeniture with absolute primogeniture , he is the first british prince to be ranked behind an elder sister in the line of succession. [ 20 ]

in historical linguistics , klingenheben's law describes a cluster of four syllable-final sound changes governing the lenition of certain consonants in earlier forms of the hausa language . the four sound changes affect the velar stops , coronal stops , labial obstruents , and the bilabial nasal , respectively, though only the first two are universal to all dialects of the language. in short, in syllable-final position, the affected consonants underwent lenition when the following sound was a syllable-initial consonant. when other morphophonological changes affected the position of that consonant within a syllable, namely shifting it from the end of one syllable to beginning of the following syllable, the law no longer applied, leading to phonological alternation . klingenheben's law has been employed as an example of geminate inalterability , a process which explains the exceptional behavior of geminate consonants in certain contexts. it is considered one of the two most important sound laws governing hausa's consonantal inventory and syllable structure, the other being the law of codas in reduplication with which it was once considered a part of the same process. the law is named for the german africanist august klingenheben [ de ; ru ] who first described the process in the late 1920s. hausa is a chadic language spoken by about 20 million people in the sahel region of central and western africa , though most speakers are centered around northern nigeria. [ 1 ] a part of the larger afroasiatic language family , it is distantly related to languages like arabic , hebrew , amharic , and somali . [ 2 ] at the time of the law's first description, it was unclear that hausa numbered among the chadic languages. [ 3 ] in an article for the 1927/1928 issue of the zeitschrift für eingeborenen-sprachen ('journal for indigenous languages'), the german africanist august klingenheben [ de ; ru ] described processes he had discovered, which he termed collectively as silbenauslautgesetze ('syllable-final [sound] laws'). [ 4 ] klingenheben proposed this sound law after analyzing the irregularity of the language's surface representation . by positing the historical sound changes contained within the law, klingenheben was able to make sense of the contrasting forms. [ 3 ] along with the law of codas in reduplication , klingenheben's law is considered to be one of the two most impactful sound laws on hausa's modern consonant inventory and syllable structure. [ 5 ] the two processes are closely linked; earlier linguists, including klingenheben, considered them to be part of the same process because of their shared operational position in syllable coda and lenition of coronal obstruents to [r] . however, the law of codas in reduplication creates geminates from velars and labials instead of [w] and, while it has had diachronic effects, it is still productive in modern hausa. [ 6 ] klingenheben's law has been described as hausa's best-known sound change. [ 7 ] klingenheben's law describes a series of four historical sound changes in hausa which lenited its syllable-final consonants. [ 8 ] despite being clustered under the same umbrella term, these sound changes differed in chronology and manner of development. [ 3 ] when the consonant is found in the syllable onset , the surface and underlying representations of the sound match, but when the underlying consonant found in coda , it is converted to its alternative surface form. [ 3 ] the infix -àa- , which partially accounts for some pluralizations, for example, affects the position of the alternating phoneme within the syllable by shifting the initial syllable's coda consonant to the onset of a new following syllable. in other words, the insertion of affixes can shift the position of the consonant from the syllable's end to the syllable's beginning, affecting the way that sound is pronounced based on that context, or alternation . [ 9 ] the velar rule affected hausa's velar stops – / k / , / g / , and / kʼ / – and probably their labialized forms – /kʷ/ , /gʷ/ , and /kʷʼ/ – which became the semivowel consonant [ w ] in syllable-final position. [ 10 ] the process is clear in an example like ɓáunáa ('buffalo'), which is derived from an earlier form * ɓáknáa . there is a syllable boundary between the /k/ and the /n/ in this earlier form and, since the /k/ is a velar stop in the syllable-final position, this stop was converted to [w] . [ 11 ] when compared with the plural form ɓákàanée , however, which involves infixing the long vowel -àa- thereby breaking up the /k/ and the /n/ from each other, the syllable structure is reorganized; in this pluralized form, the /k/ is in syllable-first position as a part of the syllable -kàa- and is thus not affected by klingenheben's law. [ 11 ] while the velar rule does occur in word-final position, it is relatively rare. [ 11 ] similarly, the coronal rule, also referred to as the rhotacization rule, converted the coronal stops – / t / , / d / , and / ɗ / – to a rolled [ r ] , written as ⟨ř⟩ in the literature. [ 11 ] [ a ] in the western hausa dialect , this rolled [r] resulted in the lateral liquid [ l ] , probably developing as a later innovation from the rolled [r] . while the rule is thought to have also applied to the coronal affricate / t͡s / , other sound changes have obfuscated the data; there are no obvious examples of the process having affected it which are not explainable by other processes. [ 13 ] the coronal rule is largely responsible for the rhotic distinction between the coronal trill [r] and the retroflex tap [ ɽ ] in modern hausa. [ 11 ] examples of this contrast include the singular fářkée ('itinerant trader') with its plural form fátàakée , which contrasts with the fárkóo ('beginning') which has a retroflex tap in the same functional environment. [ 14 ] the coronal process has remained productive in modern hausa; terms that exhibit underlyingly syllable-final coronal stops as a result of clipping demonstrate this rhotacism . examples of this include the unclipped form 'yáatásà ('his daughter') with its clipped counterpart 'yářsà . [ 15 ] like the velar process, there are examples of the process occurring in word-final position, such as kâř ('don't!'), though they are few in number. [ 16 ] while klingenheben originally included all coronal consonants , the evidence conclusively shows that only stops were affected by the process, though certain unexplainable alternations persist. [ 17 ] similarly, there are some examples of word-final /s/ alternation with [r] , but these are rare and less-commonly used. [ 16 ] klingenheben's analysis also provides for the inclusion of the syllable-final retroflex tap in this rule, but the tap is only replaced with the coronal trill in word-final position, not syllable-final position. examples of word-medial, syllable-final shifts from the retroflex tap to the coronal trill are attested, they are the result of other phonological processes. [ 18 ] while the coronal fricatives / s / and / z / later assimilated to an adjacent / n / as evidenced by the lack of these clusters, this is not considered to be a process of klingenheben's law and is rather a more recent development. [ 16 ] like the velar rule, the labial rule renders the labial obstruents – / f / (from its historical form /*p/ ), / b / , and / ɓ / – as [w] . [ 19 ] [ b ] the labial process is restricted to the eastern and southern dialects of hausa; it does not affect western hausa at all. [ 5 ] [ 19 ] contrast the eastern and southern form áudùgáa ('cotton') with its western counterpart ábdùgáa . [ 19 ] this process is considered incomplete, as it does not have the regular exceptionlessness typically required for a sound law to be considered such. paul newman considers the labial process to be a synchronic snapshot of a diachronic process; that is, the labial rule is a sound law in the process of developing. [ 19 ] the change is almost fully completed when the consonant is followed by a syllable-initial /ɽ/ or / ʃ / . when followed by syllable-initial /d/ , /ɗ/ , / d͡ʒ ~ ʒ / , or /k/ , the process is unpredictable and lexically specific. if the following syllable-initial consonant is either /g/ , /t/ , or / t͡ʃ / , the process does not occur almost at all. [ 23 ] the nasal rule, affecting the bilabial nasal / m / , is unique in that it is the only of the four rules in klingenheben's law that affects a sound other than an obstruent. like the labial and the velar rules, it converts the nasal into [w] , though unlike either of the other rules, it requires that the following syllable-initial consonant be a coronal sonorant . [ 24 ] the nasal process, similarly to the labial process, is also limited to particular dialects. [ 22 ] the rule does not apply unless the /m/ occurs before a syllable-initial /r/ or /n/ ; in non-western dialects, the /m/ will simply assimilate to the following consonant's point of articulation . contrast the western hausa term gàmzáakìi ('morning star') with the dialectal variant gànzáakìi rather than * gàuzáakìi . [ 25 ] the nominal derivational suffix -níyáa , used for expressive depictions of sounds and actions, appears to block the nasal process altogether, such as in the contrast between bàzàřníyáa ('moving around in ragged clothes'), which affects the preceding velar, and gwàlàmníyáa ('speaking unintelligibly'), where the /m/ and /n/ meet at the syllable boundary. [ 26 ] because of the distinct subsystem of behavior ideophones exhibit in hausa, this rule is considered to be a morphological exception rather than a phonological one; that is, ideophones form a separate class of words which are not subject to the same phonological constraints as other classes. [ 26 ] the process sometimes affected the preceding vowels. in syllables where the final consonant is a velar and the preceding vowel was either /i/ or /u/ , the resulting vowel was the long vowel uu . [ 5 ] [ 22 ] this change explains the relationship between words like jìkíi ('body'), which were not affected by the law, with those like júunáa ('one another'), which were affected. in this example, the historical form * jǐk-náa had its velar consonant /k/ affected by labializing process, becoming /w/ . the resulting sequence * jǐw-náa was reinterpreted with the long vowel uu . [ 5 ] klingenheben's law has been used to describe possible explanations for geminate inalterability , a process wherein phonological rules affecting a short single phoneme – known as a "singleton segment" – are blocked in comparable positions when the phoneme is geminated. [ 27 ] hausa syllable structure does not allow for tautosyllabic consonant clusters and thus these geminates can be understood as heterosyllabic; that is, the geminate straddles both sides of the syllable boundary. [ 28 ] any syllable-final singleton which would be converted to a sonorant in accordance with klingenheben's law is not converted in this syllable-final position if it is a geminate. [ 29 ] in what order these four sound changes occurred is unclear, but the most recent sound changes are those affecting the labial obstruents and bilabial nasal. given the coronal rule's persistence in modern hausa, it is possible that the velar rule precedes it, though the coronal rule's exceptionlessness is also cause to credit it as older than the velar rule. [ 22 ] although klingenheben viewed these two changes as part of one rule affecting all labial consonants, this is no longer considered likely; the rules affecting both are restricted to particular dialects and those affecting labial obstruents are partially conditioned where the change in the labial nasal in dialects where it occurs has no exceptions to the rule. [ 22 ] the linguistic evidence shows that the sound changes occurred sometime after word-medial ii and uu were lowered to ee and oo , respectively, which was an early sound change. given this sound change's earliness, most of the process is no longer observable, but a handful of verbal noun examples and high tone–only verbs with certain suffixes prove this chronology, such as góogèe ('rub') with its verbal noun counterpart gúugàa ('rubbing') and tsíirá ('escape') with its suffixed counterpart tséerèe ('escape from'). [ 30 ]

in historical linguistics , a sound change is a change in the pronunciation of a language. a sound change can involve the replacement of one speech sound (or, more generally, one phonetic feature value) by a different one (called phonetic change ) or a more general change to the speech sounds that exist ( phonological change ), such as the merger of two sounds or the creation of a new sound. a sound change can eliminate the affected sound, or a new sound can be added. sound changes can be environmentally conditioned if the change occurs in only some sound environments , and not others. the term "sound change" refers to diachronic changes, which occur in a language's sound system. on the other hand, " alternation " refers to changes that happen synchronically (within the language of an individual speaker, depending on the neighbouring sounds) and do not change the language's underlying system (for example, the -s in the english plural can be pronounced differently depending on the preceding sound, as in bet [s], bed [z], which is a form of alternation, rather than sound change). since "sound change" can refer to the historical introduction of an alternation (such as postvocalic /k/ in the tuscan dialect , which was once [k] as in di [k] arlo 'of carlo' but is now [h] di [h] arlo and alternates with [k] in other positions: con [k] arlo 'with carlo'), that label is inherently imprecise and must often be clarified as referring to either phonemic change or restructuring. research on sound change is usually conducted under the working assumption that it is regular , which means that it is expected to apply mechanically whenever its structural conditions are met, irrespective of any non-phonological factors like the meaning of the words that are affected. apparent exceptions to regular change can occur because of dialect borrowing, grammatical analogy, or other causes known and unknown, and some changes are described as "sporadic" and so they affect only one or a few particular words, without any apparent regularity. the neogrammarian linguists of the 19th century introduced the term sound law to refer to rules of regular change, perhaps in imitation of the laws of physics, [ 1 ] and the term "law" is still used in referring to specific sound rules that are named after their authors like grimm's law , grassmann's law , etc. real-world sound laws often admit exceptions, but the expectation of their regularity or absence of exceptions is of great heuristic value [ further explanation needed ] by allowing historical linguists to define the notion of regular correspondence by the comparative method . [ citation needed ] each sound change is limited in space and time and so it functions in a limited area (within certain dialects ) and for a limited period of time. for those and other reasons, the term "sound law" has been criticized for implying a universality that is unrealistic for sound change. [ 2 ] a sound change that affects the phonological system or the number or the distribution of its phonemes is a phonological change . the following statements are used as heuristics in formulating sound changes as understood within the neogrammarian model. however, for modern linguistics, they are not taken as inviolable rules but are seen as guidelines. sound change has no memory : sound change does not discriminate between the sources of a sound. if a previous sound change causes x,y > y (features x and y merge as y), a new one cannot affect only an original x. sound change ignores grammar : a sound change can have only phonological constraints, like x > z in unstressed syllables . for example, it cannot affect only adjectives . the only exception is that a sound change may recognise word boundaries, even when they are unindicated by prosodic clues. also, sound changes may be regularized in inflectional paradigms (such as verbal inflection), when it is no longer phonological but morphological in nature. [ 3 ] sound change is exceptionless : if a sound change can happen at a place, it will affect all sounds that meet the criteria for change. apparent exceptions are possible because of analogy and other regularization processes, another sound change, or an unrecognized conditioning factor. that is the traditional view expressed by the neogrammarians. in the past decades, however, it has been shown [ by whom? ] that sound change does not necessarily affect all possible words. [ citation needed ] however, when a sound change is initiated, it often eventually expands to the whole lexicon . for example, the spanish fronting of the vulgar latin [g] ( voiced velar stop ) before [i e ɛ] seems to have reached every possible word. by contrast, the voicing of word-initial latin [k] to [g] occurred in colaphus > golpe and cattus > gato but not in canna > caña . see also lexical diffusion . sound change is inevitable : all languages vary from place to place and time to time, and neither writing nor media prevents that change. is to be read as "sound a changes into (or is replaced by, is reflected as, etc.) sound b". therefore, a belongs to an older stage of the language in question, and b belongs to a more recent stage. the symbol ">" can be reversed, b < a, which also means that the (more recent) b derives from the (older) a": the two sides of such a statement indicate only the start and the end of the change, but additional intermediate stages may have occurred. the example above is actually a compressed account of a sequence of changes: * [t] first changed to [θ] (like the initial consonant of english thin ), which has since yielded [f] and can be represented more fully: unless a change operates unconditionally (in all environments), the context in which it applies must be specified: the symbol "#" stands for a word boundary (initial or final) and so the notation "/__#" means "word-finally", and "/#__" means "word-initially": in historical linguistics , a number of traditional terms designate types of phonetic change, either by nature or result. a number of such types are often (or usually) sporadic, that is, more or less accidents that happen to a specific form. others affect a whole phonological system. sound changes that affect a whole phonological system are also classified according to how they affect the overall shape of the system; see phonological change .

aquilegia vulgaris is a species of perennial flowering plant of the genus aquilegia (columbine) in the family ranunculaceae . commonly called the common columbine , european crowfoot , and granny's bonnet , it presently possesses the most expansive range and greatest morphological variability in its genus. the current wild range of a. vulgaris includes its native range in europe as well as introduced populations in asia, oceania, north america (where it has become naturalized ), and south america. the wild form of a. vulgaris can grow flowering stems that 90 cm (35 in) tall from and often form a bushy clump at its base. in their native range, the species blooms from may to june. the flowers, with diameters measuring up to 60 mm (2.4 in) across, are typically blue or purple and possess petals with structures known as nectar spurs . associated with fertility goddesses in ancient greece and ancient rome , archeological evidence suggests a. vulgaris was in cultivation by the 2nd century ad in roman britain . the species came to represent virtuous behavior, the holy spirit , and the trinity within christian art ; in other contexts, such as william shakespeare 's hamlet , a. vulgaris was a malevolent symbol. while it has been treated as an herbal remedy since the middle ages , some chemicals within the plant are toxic to humans. the species was given its scientific binomial name by carl linnaeus in his 1753 species plantarum . some horticultural varieties, known as cultivars , that were developed by the 16th century have remained popular with gardeners. cultivars of a. vulgaris have continued to be developed, as have hybrids crossing it with other columbines. the resulted plants produce an array of colors and double-flowered examples. aquilegia vulgaris is a perennial herbaceous flowering plant of the genus aquilegia in the family ranunculaceae . an a. vulgaris plant possesses a thick rootstock that can be either simple or branched, with one or two flowering stems . [ 2 ] : 203 a. vulgaris plants often form bushy clumps from which their thin stems project upward. [ 3 ] the aerial stems grow to between 50 cm (20 in) and 90 cm (35 in) tall and can be between 3 mm (0.12 in) and 5 mm (0.20 in) wide at their bases. [ 2 ] : 203 [ 4 ] : 46 these stems are leafy and are pubescent (covered in hairs). the hairs are whitish and are absent on some plants of the species. the branches from the stems are glabrous (covered in glands) and pubescent, with the top portions showing more pubescence than below. the hairs are small and whitish. [ 2 ] : 203 the basal leaves (leaves attached to the base of the plant) are present in large quantities and can reach between 22 cm (8.7 in) and 40 cm (16 in) long when including their petioles . the petioles themselves can reach between 14 cm (5.5 in) and 27 cm (11 in) long. these leaves are biternate, with each leaflet itself subdivided in three. the thin leaf blades of basal leaves are glabrous on their top sides. they are glaucous (pale blue-grey) and pubescent beneath. there are also cauline leaves (leaves attached to an aerial stem) which are borne on petioles between 0.1 cm (0.039 in) and 11 cm (4.3 in) in length. the cauline leaves, which appear singularly or in pairs, are similar to the basal leaves but become smaller and simplified the further up a stem they appear. [ 2 ] : 203–204 wild a. vulgaris plants flower between may and june in their native range. [ 2 ] : 204 in north america, where a. vulgaris is naturalized , [ 5 ] : 125 plants flower with a spring to summer bloom from may to july. [ 6 ] the inflorescences of the species can feature between three and eighteen flowers. the bracts are a bit glabrous or scarcely pubescent and are downy beneath. the bracts split into three segments that are each lanceolate in shape. the peduncles are particularly downy and are densely covered by small hair-like structures called trichomes . [ 2 ] : 204 wild a. vulgaris flowers, particularly those on the form that is sometimes called aquilegia vulgaris subsp. vulgaris , are typically blue or purple, with rare examples of white and reddish flowers. [ 2 ] : 204 [ 6 ] [ 7 ] : 379 the flowers are in a nodding orientation (facing downwards) and have diameters of between 30 mm (1.2 in) and 60 mm (2.4 in). the primary flowers of an inflorescence are proportionally larger – possessing flowers considered medium- to small-sized within the genus – than the secondary flowers of that inflorescence. [ 2 ] : 204 the five petaloid sepals of the flower can be oriented divergent or perpendicular to the floral axis . [ 8 ] : 49 [ 6 ] [ 7 ] : 376 these sepals are ovate to ovate-lanceolate in shape, coming to acute tips. the sepals of a flower are shorter than its petals , measuring between 15 mm (0.59 in) and 30 mm (1.2 in) long and 6 mm (0.24 in) to 16 mm (0.63 in) wide. the inner structure of the flowers form a cup-like appearance. [ 2 ] : 204 wild aquilegia vulgaris , as with other aquilegia , have five petals which possess nectar spurs , a form of nectar -bearing structure. [ 7 ] : 376 [ 5 ] : 31 the petals are medium-sized within the genus and are isotropic, with lengths and widths of between 22 mm (0.87 in) and 34 mm (1.3 in). the broad portion (the limb ) of the petal is shorter than its nectar spur. the limbs have broad, rounded ends and measure 10 mm (0.39 in) to 14 mm (0.55 in) long and 8 mm (0.31 in) to 13 mm (0.51 in) wide. the obconical spurs can be hooked or, more rarely, curved. the spurs range in length from 12 mm (0.47 in) to 20 mm (0.79 in) long and are between 4 mm (0.16 in) and 8 mm (0.31 in) at their opening (the throat ). [ 2 ] : 204 the spurs have an even tapper as they narrow towards their ends. [ 6 ] each flower features multiple stamens , [ 5 ] : 32 which measure between 9 mm (0.35 in) and 13 mm (0.51 in) long. the fruit of the plant are follicles which are between 15 mm (0.59 in) and 25 mm (0.98 in) long. [ 6 ] members of aquilegia produce largely quantities of seeds, which are black. [ 5 ] : 32 a. vulgaris seeds have shiny surfaces and lack elaiosome (a fleshy mass present on some seeds). [ 4 ] : 46 [ 9 ] the species's seeds are between 2.2 mm (0.087 in) and 2.5 mm (0.098 in) long and have been recorded as weighing 1.53 mg (0.0236 gr). [ 4 ] : 46 [ 9 ] the plant's chromosome number is 2 n =14. [ 6 ] aphids , a type of insect, are known to attack columbines. this is particularly the case for a. vulgaris and hybrids closely related to it. aphid infestations can result in stunted growth, sticky honeydew accumulations on the basal leaves, and flowers that are deformed or fail to open. [ 5 ] : 20–21 among cyanophore (organism that produces a blue color) aquilegia like a. vulgaris , the cyanogenic glycosides compounds dhurrin and triglochinin have been observed. cyanogenic glycosides generally taste bitter and can be toxic to animals and humans. ingestion of 20 g (0.71 oz) of fresh a. vulgaris leaves by a human was observed as causing convulsions, respiratory distress, and heart failure. a child who consumed 12 a. vulgaris flowers experienced weakness of the limbs, cyanosis , drowsiness, and miosis ; all symptoms abated after three hours. [ 10 ] the acute toxicity test in mice showed that ethanol extract and the main flavonoid compound isocytisoside from the leaves and stems of aquilegia vulgaris can be classified as nontoxic since a dose of 3000 mg/kg did not cause mortality in mice. [ 11 ] nicholas culpeper recommended the seeds taken in wine to speed the process of childbirth. in modern herbal medicine it is used as an astringent and diuretic . [ 12 ] the first reliable descriptions of aquilegia vulgaris were written by medieval european mystics and scientists including the 12th-century abbess hildegard of bingen – who considered the plant's herbal functions – and the 13th-century friar albertus magnus . [ 2 ] : 23 the binomial name aquilegia vulgaris was first used by the swedish biologist carl linnaeus in his 1753 book species plantarum . [ 5 ] : 124 a vulgaris is the most morphologically variable species of aquilegia . [ 5 ] : 124 it is also at the head of a species complex that comprises the majority of european aquilegia , with a minority morphologically aligning with the aquilegia alpina complex. [ 5 ] : 35 [ 2 ] : 23 the a. vulgaris complex is typified as possessing longer spurs than other eurasian species, an adaptation suited to pollination by bumblebees with longer tongues. this difference in pollination adaptations corresponds with the distinction between the north american aquilegia complexes: aquilegia canadensis is adapted to hummingbird pollination and the aquilegia coerulea complex is adapted to moth pollination. [ 13 ] : 355 the genus name aquilegia may come from the latin word for "eagle", aquila , in reference to the petals' resemblance to eagle talons. [ 14 ] a more likely etymology for aquilegia is a derivation from the latin aquam legere "to collect water", aquilegium (a container of water), or aquilex ("dowser" or "water-finder") in reference to the profusion of nectar in the spurs. [ 15 ] [ 5 ] : 37–38 the specific name vulgaris is latin for "common". [ 16 ] [ 5 ] : 124 common names for the species include the common columbine, european crowfoot, and granny's bonnet. [ 3 ] [ 17 ] the word columbine , the common name for species in the genus, derives from the latin word columbinus , meaning "dove", a reference to the flowers' appearance being similar to a group of doves. [ 5 ] : 37–38 [ 14 ] originally a european species, aquilegia vulgaris possibly originated in the balkans . [ 2 ] : 208 it has since spread to become the most widely distributed aquilegia species. [ 5 ] : 124 its range has expanded – both through natural radiation and human assistance – to include introduced populations that have sometimes become naturalized in africa, macaronesia , the americas, and oceania. [ 2 ] : 207–208 the species is also present in asia, with populations in the russian far east and uzbekistan . [ 1 ] these introduced populations typically originated from ornamental cultivation. [ 2 ] : 207 in europe, the species ranges northward into southern scandinavia and england. [ 4 ] : 46 the boundaries of species's distribution in northern europe , simplified by a. vulgaris being the exclusive member of the genus in this region, has been understood since the 19th century. [ 2 ] : 208 the southern european distribution of the species is less defined, as its radiation through the iberian , italian , and balkan peninsulas has brought it into contact with other columbines in that region with introgressive effects . [ 2 ] : 208 the species also ranges east into western russia. [ 4 ] : 46 aquilegia ballii , sometimes considered a variety of a. vulgaris , inhabits the atlas mountains and is the only aquilegia in africa. [ 5 ] : 127 the american botanist and gardener robert nold, saying that there was little evidence for the previous species's absence in any part of europe and that expansion was a natural process, viewed categorizations of any european populations of a. vulgaris as naturalized rather than as native were "tenuous at best". [ 5 ] : 125 the royal botanic gardens, kew 's plants of the world online (powo) records the species as native to albania, austria, the balkans, the baltic states , belarus, belgium, the british isles, bulgaria, corsica , continental france, germany, the iberians and italian peninsulas, the low countries , poland, sicily , switzerland, and parts of european russia. powo considers the populations in denmark, the caucasus , scandinavia, ukraine, and portions of european russian as introduced. [ 1 ] the italian botanist enio nardi considered several hypotheses for how a. vulgaris reached the british isles . the earliest was through a plateau that connected to continental europe during the late miocene (prior to 5.333 million years ago). other possibilities for a later arrival include during quaternary glaciations or as recently as within the period of recorded history . [ 2 ] : 131 introduced populations of a. vulgaris live in macaronesia, a series of archipelagos in the atlantic ocean off the north african and european coasts. the species has been repeatedly recorded as present on the azores , canary islands , and madeira since at least 1932. on tenerife , one of the canary islands, the plant has been reported as present since at least 1974. [ 2 ] : 208 the species is naturalized in north america, [ 5 ] : 125 where it escaped from cultivation as an ornamental plant. it is established within cooler environments on the continent. [ 18 ] while most of the naturalized populations are the wild form with blue or purple flowers, others descend from horticultural forms with white, red, or pink flowers. [ 6 ] [ 18 ] some forms of the species present on the continent are likely the descendants of hybrids between a. vulgaris and other aquilegia . populations of a. vulgaris exist on both the pacific and atlantic coasts of canada and the united states. [ 6 ] a. vulgaris was among several foreign species proposed as the national flowers of the united states during the early 20th century. [ 19 ] in oceania, the species has been introduced to new south wales , tasmania , and victoria in australia and both the north and south islands of new zealand. introduced populations have been recorded in south america since at least 1845, when it was recorded as present in chilean cultivation. a. vulgaris populations in chilea and argentina have both been recorded in the 21st century. [ 2 ] : 208 archaeobotanical evidence suggests that aquilegia vulgaris was cultivated for ornamental purposes in 3rd-century ad roman britain . [ 2 ] : 25 the discoveries of singular a. vulgaris seeds in burnt waste pits at alcester and leicester have been interpreted as evidence of their planting in gardens. [ 20 ] finds of columbines at a late saxon site near winchester cathedral and three later medieval german sites have also been interpreted as using the plant for gardening. [ 21 ] in 12-century italy, people may have supported a. vulgaris or aquilegia atrata populations near religious structures, possibly due to the contemporary treatment of columbines as christian symbols. [ 2 ] : 25 by the 16th century, selectively bred horticultural a. vulgaris were being recorded in europe. linnaeus made mention of some horticultural a. vulgaris when describing the species in 1753 in what was a rare inclusion of cultivated plants within his work. presently, a. vulgaris is a frequently cultivated garden plant, though the wild form of the species is rare in such settings. it is most commonly grown in its many cultivated forms, known as cultivars . [ 22 ] : 167 some of these cultivars were developed centuries ago and remain popular among gardeners in the northern parts of the globe. some cultivars produce particular colors, while others were bred as double-flowered plants where stamens produce petals or have sepal-like perianths . [ 2 ] : 25 the species is suited to sunny and partially shaded settings within usda hardiness zones 3 through 10. [ 22 ] : 167 a. vulgaris plants generally only live three or four years in garden settings and can be interpreted as having biennial -like lifespans. within their lifetime, each plant can produce dozens of seedlings . deadheading (removing dead flowers) before a plant expends the energy necessary to produce seeds can extend the lifespan of any columbine. [ 5 ] : 18 the single-flowering cultivar 'nivea' (also known as 'munstead white') [ 8 ] received the royal horticultural society 's award of garden merit . [ 23 ] [ 22 ] : 167 'nivea' plants grow to 90 cm (35 in) tall, have grey-green foliage, and possess white flowers. other single-flowering cultivars include 'heidi' and 'hensol harebell', both of which can reach can reach 60 cm (24 in) tall and have nodding flowers. 'heidi' plants have purple-red stems and pink flowers, while 'hensol harebell' flowers are short-spurred and mauve -blue. [ 22 ] : 167 the double-flowered cultivars of a. vulgaris are divided into groups. within the flore pleno group, which includes the white-flowered 'graeme iddon' and mauve-blue-flowered 'rougham star', the flowers are elongated and the petals are rounded. the stellata group's double flowers are star-shaped and have pointed petals. this group includes the dark purple-flowered 'black barlow', the blue-flowered 'blue barlow', the multicolor-flowered 'nora barlow', and the light-pink flower 'rose barlow'. the cultivars of the veraeneana group come in several colors of flower and possess green and gold marveled foliage. [ 22 ] : 167 european columbines such as aquilegia vulgaris have been assigned several meanings since the ancient period. within art, a. vulgaris has been a symbol of both moral and immoral behaviors, as well as an ornamental motif . [ 2 ] : 19–23 [ 24 ] in ancient greece and ancient rome , the spurs of columbines were interpreted as phallic and the plants were associated with the fertility goddesses aphrodite and venus . [ 24 ] in william shakespeare 's elizabethan drama hamlet , the character ophelia presents king claudius with flowers that include a. vulgaris , [ 25 ] where the species symbolic of deception and serves as an omen of death. [ 2 ] : 21 in the garden of earthly delights (1503–1504) by hieronymus bosch , a. vulgaris serves as a symbol for bodily pleasures. [ 2 ] : 21 medieval european artists associated a. vulgaris with both sacredness and sublimity, with flemish painters of the 15th century frequently depicting the plant in prominent locations within their christian artworks . [ 2 ] : 19 among the flemish works of this period featuring a. vulgaris are rogier van der weyden 's lamentation of christ ( c. 1450 ), hans memling 's the last judgment (1470–1472) and flowers in a jug ( c. 1485 ), and hugo van der goes 's portinari altarpiece (1475–1476). [ 2 ] : 19 with its dove-like flowers, the species came to symbolize the holy spirit , such as in a 1497 parisian book of hours by german printer thielman kerver. [ 26 ] [ 24 ] the interpretation of the five spurs as five doves saw columbines called "five birds together" in austria. a set of seven columbine flowers was associated with the seven gifts of the holy spirit . the numeric symbolism of columbines was extended to its leaves, with their three-lobed form drawing associations with the trinity . [ 24 ]

edwin rist , also known by the pseudonym edwin reinhard , is an american flautist, fly-tyer , and burglar known for stealing 299 rare or extinct bird specimens from the natural history museum at tring , england, in 2009 in order to craft artificial flies . edwin rist was born to two ivy league graduates [ 2 ] in new york city. he was homeschooled and his family moved to the hudson valley when he was young. [ 3 ] he became interested in flute-playing at a young age, and won several competitions at ten years old. after watching a documentary film about fly-tying as a child, he became obsessed with the art form. the first artificial flies he crafted were made from feathers he took from his parents' pillows. he went on to participate in fly-tying events and quickly gained attention in the fly-tying community for his young age and skill level. after a mentor introduced him to flies from the victorian era made from exotic bird feathers, he began seeking rare feathers for his craft. by the age of fifteen he had connections with multiple zoos and aviaries that allowed him to cheaply collect rare feathers. he also published a book on fly-tying that was well-received by the hobby's community. [ 2 ] after being accepted into the royal academy of music , rist left his fly-tying supplies in the united states and moved to the united kingdom. as a result of the 2008 financial crisis , he began to struggle financially and sought to reestablish his fly-tying influence overseas. [ 2 ] in 2009, rist visited the natural history museum at tring 's bird collection while posing as a professional photographer. he photographed birds that he planned to steal, as well as the hallways, locations of specimens, and entrance and exit points of the museum to plan a break-in. he planned his heist using a microsoft word document titled "plan for museum invasion". [ 3 ] on june 23, 2009, he performed at a concert in london before taking a train to tring. [ 3 ] he then broke into the museum with a glass cutter , a large suitcase, and a pair of latex gloves. he stole 299 bird specimens, primarily brightly colored adult males. specimens stolen included quetzals , cotingas , bowerbirds , house crows , and birds-of-paradise , including some that had been collected by alfred russel wallace . [ 4 ] the stolen birds were not noticed to be missing until a month after the theft. [ 2 ] rist was arrested in november 2010 [ 1 ] and confessed to the burglary. [ 5 ] of the 299 stolen birds, 174 were found intact, but most had their identifying labels removed, which ruined their scientific value. [ 6 ] rist admitted to having stolen the specimens for the purpose of crafting artificial flies. he additionally had illegally sold some of the feathers on ebay [ 7 ] in order to use the money to purchase a golden flute. [ 2 ] clinical psychologist simon baron-cohen diagnosed rist with asperger syndrome , arguing that an obsessional interest in the art of fly-tying made rist unaware of the consequences of his actions. [ 8 ] additionally, his lawyer argued that the theft was a " james bond fantasy". due to his diagnosis, rist was given a suspended sentence . [ 3 ] [ 4 ] rist was ordered to pay £125,150, equivalent to £202,680 in 2023, but faced no prison time. [ 9 ] rist's bird heist served as the basis for the 2018 true crime book the feather thief by kirk w. johnson . [ 3 ] [ 6 ] it was announced in 2022 that a television adaptation of the book was being developed by jenna bush hager alongside universal pictures . [ 10 ] [ 11 ] after graduating from the royal academy of music, rist moved to germany. there he started a youtube channel under the pseudonym edwin reinhard on which he posted heavy metal flute music videos. [ 4 ] he continues to play the flute in orchestras in germany. [ 3 ]

this is a record of material that was recently featured on the main page as part of did you know (dyk). recently created new articles , greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration . archives are generally grouped by month of main page appearance. (currently, dyk hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the main page.) to find which archive contains the fact that appeared on did you know, go to the article's talk page and follow the archive link in the dyk talk page message box.

creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help out with other tasks first to learn more about how wikipedia works. you can always come back to create an article later; there is no rush ! welcome to wikipedia! creating a new article is one of many ways to contribute to the encyclopedia , but can be difficult for new editors. please take the time to read through this guide. also consider looking at our introductory tutorials or contributing to wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. working on existing articles is a great way to learn wikipedia's protocols and style conventions ; see the task center or your homepage for articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. once you are familiar with the basics of wikipedia editing , this page will guide you through the process of creating your first article ! specifically, you will learn how to: all new articles start by researching a topic using high-quality, published sources . even an expert on a topic cannot directly use their knowledge; published sources are needed. high-quality sources include books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers , peer-reviewed scientific and academic journals , and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy . this may include some high-quality websites, but excludes personal and company websites, blogs , social media , and any site where the public can contribute , like forums and even wikipedia itself . we summarize such high-quality, published sources in wikipedia articles. that is all we do! please make sure that everything you write on wikipedia is based on such sources, and be sure to include inline citations along with the content you write. while primary sources can be used, they should be used sparingly and carefully, usually only to support basic facts. primary sources do not contribute to establishing notability. if you have a personal or professional relationship with what you want to write about, it is best if you do not create the new article yourself. editing with a conflict of interest , regardless of whether you feel you can do so neutrally, gives the appearance of bias and undermines public confidence in wikipedia. if you create an article despite your conflict of interest, you should disclose your relationship and make sure that it is reviewed by another editor. if you have a financial conflict of interest in the topic (for example if you have been paid to edit it) you must make the required paid-contribution disclosure and abide by the community's restrictions on paid editing . the english wikipedia already has 7.0 million articles. before creating a new one, try to make sure there is not already an article (or a draft in development) on the same topic, perhaps under a different spelling, or even a different name. note: articles are in "main" space, and drafts are in "draft" space. if you're sure that there is no article or draft available for your topic, then there is just one big task to do before you start writing your first article: you have to gather sources about the topic in order to establish its notability . as described above in § the basics , wikipedia articles are written based on published sources. if you need some help finding sources, see this helpful guide . for some common sources, you may find these assessments by the wikipedia community helpful. please note these assessments certainly do not list all possible sources: if a source is not listed, that only means it has not met the criteria for listing. if a source meets the reliable source criteria, you are welcome to use it. if you have questions, please do ask at the teahouse . your topic must be notable , as wikipedia uses the term , in order to warrant an article. wikipedia has articles on many topics, but not every topic. notability is tricky to define, but in a nutshell, if there are multiple published reliable sources about a topic, then it may be notable. a topic is not notable if there aren't sufficient reliable sources about it. ( important: unreliable ones like blogs , social media , and websites anyone can edit don't count!) the general notability guideline gives more details on how to tell if a topic is notable or not. if you're not sure if your topic is notable, ask for help at the teahouse . a notable topic is one that has reliable sources that each meet all three of the following criteria: if you discover the topic is not notable, stop here. non-notable topics do not qualify for a separate article. consider expanding a relevant existing article related to the topic or select a new topic. if you are stuck, ask for guidance at the teahouse . it's a good idea to look at several existing wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. the quality of our existing articles varies and lower quality articles should not be used as a model. the talk page of the article may have a quality rating in the shaded box at the top. if an article has been assessed as b -class, or as a good article or featured article , it is safe to use as an organizational template for your article. you can also consult wikipedia's manual of style for guidance on how to structure an article. once you've verified that there § isn't already an article out there about your topic, § gathered your sources , and § established notability , you're ready to start writing! wikipedia provides various editing tools , and you have a choice of what tool best suits your needs: visual editor is the default. to switch your default editing interface, select an option from the "editing mode" menu in your preferences . users of mobile devices are automatically redirected to the official mobile version of wikipedia at en.m.wikipedia.org . if you don't want to use the mobile version, tap the desktop link at the bottom of any page to switch to the desktop version at en.wikipedia.org . where will you develop your draft? you have several options: the easiest way is with the article wizard, which will create your article in draft space and guide you through the steps of creating a draft. sources are the published books, academic articles, reputable magazines and newspapers, and other locations where you find the information you will be writing about. you will need to find sources before you start writing, because all content in articles at wikipedia must be verifiable —that is, backed up by reliable sources . the best way to demonstrate verifiability, is by creating a citation to a reliable source that you found, and embedding it in-line as you write your article. the best sources tend to have some form of editorial oversight and a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. some websites are reliable; many are not. if you're not sure about the reliability of a website, you can read what editors think about them . it's okay to use non-english sources , offline sources , and subscription-only or fee-based sources , as long as they are reliable. here are some "do"s and "don't"s, to highlight some of the most important points about writing your first article: when your draft is ready, you have two options for publishing it: you can do so directly yourself, or ask another editor to review it first. if you don't have an account, if your account is not yet confirmed , or if you have a conflict of interest with the article topic, you will have to ask for a review. otherwise, the choice is up to you. in either case, you should take some time to double check that the draft is ready first. take another look at your draft to see if it meets the criteria required for a wikipedia article. make sure that: if you are sure your draft is ready, and you do not have a § conflict of interest with the topic , you can publish it directly by moving the page from the draft namespace to the main article namespace. to do so, follow the instructions in how to move a page . articles published directly take longer to appear in external search engines, up to a maximum of 90 days . alternatively, if if you think your article is ready but would like another editor to check it , you can submit it for review by an experienced editor by clicking the submit the draft for review! button at the top of your draft. if the button isn't there, you can instead add {{ subst:submit }} to the top of the draft. a reviewer will then look at your draft and either publish it or give you feedback on how to improve it. you may continue to edit the page, even while waiting for a review. this may take some time (maybe weeks); please have patience, we are all volunteers. congratulations, you've created your first article! we have some suggested next steps at help:after your first article , but do pat yourself on the back. not many people have successfully created an article on wikipedia!

there is currently 1 filled queue . assistance in moving preps is requested. this page is to nominate fresh articles to appear in the " did you know " section on the main page with a "hook" (an interesting fact). nominations that have been approved are moved to a staging area and then promoted into the queue . to update this page, purge it. if this is your first nomination, please read the dyk rules before continuing. further information can be found at the dyk guidelines . successful hooks tend to have several traits . most importantly, they share a surprising or intriguing fact. they give readers enough context to understand the hook, but leave enough out to make them want to learn more. they are written for a general audience who has no prior knowledge of or interest in the topic area. lastly, they are concise, and do not attempt to cover multiple facts or present information about the subject beyond what's needed to understand the hook. this page is often backlogged. as long as your submission is still on the page, it will stay there until an editor reviews it. since editors are encouraged to review the oldest submissions first, it may take several weeks until your submission is reviewed. in the meantime, please consider reviewing another submission (not your own) to help reduce the backlog (see instructions below ). because of wp:dyktimeout , a nomination should be reviewed within two months since the reviewer/promoter may agree to reject and close an unpromoted hook after that time has passed. if you can't find the nomination you submitted to this nominations page, it may have been approved and is on the approved nominations page waiting to be promoted. it could also have been added to one of the prep areas , promoted from prep to a queue , or is on the main page. if the nominated hook is in none of those places, then the nomination has probably been rejected. such a rejection usually only occurs if it was at least a couple of weeks old and had unresolved issues for which any discussion had gone stale. if you think your nomination was unfairly rejected, you can query this on the dyk discussion page , but as a general rule such nominations will only be restored in exceptional circumstances. any editor who was not involved in writing/expanding or nominating an article may review it by checking to see that the article meets all the dyk criteria ( long enough , new enough , no serious editorial or content issues ) and the hook is cited. editors may also alter the suggested hook to improve it, suggest new hooks, or even lend a hand and make edits to the article to which the hook applies so that the hook is supported and accurate. for a more detailed discussion of the dyk rules and review process see the supplementary guidelines and the wp:did you know/reviewing guide . to post a comment or review on a dyk nomination, follow the steps outlined below: article length and age are fine, no copyvio or plagiarism concerns, reliable sources are used. but the hook needs to be shortened. if there is any problem or concern about a nomination, please consider notifying the nominator by placing {{subst:dykproblem|article|header=yes|sig=yes}} on the nominator's talk page. wanna skip all this fuss? install wp:pshaw instead! does most of the heavy lifting for ya :) }}<!--please do not write below this line or remove this line. place comments above this line.--> for more information, please see t:tdyk#how to promote an accepted hook . pbritti ( talk ) 05:12, 13 february 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] he may be a specialist, but a taxonomic authority prefers sequoites . the link you provided above considers sequoia dakotensis a synonym of sequoites dakotensis . ~ pbritti ( talk ) 15:10, 14 february 2025 (utc) [ reply ] new reviewer needed as i have substantially added and edited the article now, also the page move of the nomination here is creating editing access issues wit the nomination templates.- kev min § 15:46, 18 february 2025 (utc) [ reply ] @ narutolovehinata5 : does alt2 look better now? i hope i didn't come off as curt earlier. ~ pbritti ( talk ) 02:42, 13 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] jttheog ( talk ) 09:11, 21 february 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] no swan so fine ( talk ) 14:38, 27 february 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] @ no swan so fine and ravenpuff : having recently had a back-weighted hook sink like a lead balloon at dyk, my proposal is to deliberately front-load this one. i know it doesn't read as "smoothly" as an english sentence, but for dyk hooks, the choppiness can often work in your favour, and the evidence generally points to readers preferring front-weighted hooks because otherwise it's unclear where they are supposed to click. so the revised hook i am proposing is: reviewing... flibirigit ( talk ) 14:15, 19 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] _dk ( talk ) 23:46, 26 february 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] overall : new, long enough, and no paraphrasing issues. looks gtg. makeandtoss ( talk ) 17:38, 27 february 2025 (utc) [ reply ] kingsmasher678 ( talk ) 05:26, 28 february 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] overall : the article is interesting, but requires more work before it is eligible for wp:dyk . after that, i am inclined to request a second opinion on whether or not the article is eligible to be submitted for dyk given the date the article was first created. -- sky harbor ( talk ) 10:22, 10 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] @ sky harbor : i think that i have corrected the problems now. if possible i would like to change the hook to "some cavers prefer the rappel rack for it's excellent heat dissipation?" kingsmasher678 ( talk ) 16:14, 10 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] laun chba ller 10:35, 26 february 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] the above just rotated off wt:dyk and is now at wikipedia talk:did you know/archive 205#porn hook . i suggest one further hook – alt6 : ... that the world's biggest gang bang iii was so popular it crashed the server? – and request another reviewer.-- laun chba ller 14:47, 14 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] srnec ( talk ) 02:23, 4 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] laun chba ller 19:19, 14 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] overall : a) note - remember monday was subjected to sock edits. but i presume that user:ponyo got them all, and am not aware that that would still be a problem for this dyk - people should let me know if i am incorrect on that.b) because this nomination offers two bolded articles, a second qpq is required (one is required for each nominated article, and only one has been performed as of yet ). c) i prefer the initial hook. d) earwig found violation to be unlikely and spotchecks did not yield concerns. e) the main hook does not have any ref at the sentence in the article in which the statement is made. i got fed up of waiting for my photography request to go through, so i added the video and added the source while i was at it. i remain of the view that this should run on 17 may despite my ignored wt:dyk request (or at the very least, not until i've taken holly-anne hull through a ga review circle , which i will do once i've finished with talk:wtlv/ga1 ).-- laun chba ller 14:03, 24 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] full review needed for hull's article.-- laun chba ller 19:50, 3 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] safari scribe edits! talk! 14:02, 9 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] overall : @ safariscribe : the article is new enough and long enough. no copyvio detected. qpq done. the hook is interesting but i don't see in the source where it says he was the first person in nigeria to have a phd in statistics? the source says he was "the second person to obtain a phd degree in statistics from the university of california and the first nigerian to do so." the source makes it sound like he was first nigerian to get a phd in statistics specifically from that college. thoughts? ~wikioriginal-9~ ( talk ) 19:04, 13 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] i know bremps left that comment above about "first to do x as a y" hooks but i still think it's kind of interesting. others can disagree if they want. also, were there anymore details on his kidnapping or no? the article doesn't explain why he was kidnapped. thanks, ~wikioriginal-9~ ( talk ) 16:34, 19 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] — ercheck ( talk ) 19:37, 8 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] soman ( talk ) 16:03, 9 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] kimikel ( talk ) 15:52, 9 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] kimikel ( talk ) 01:42, 16 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] alansohn ( talk ) 11:45, 18 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] bloomagiliw ( talk ) 00:47, 17 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] your friendly neighborhood sociologist ⚧ ⓐ ( talk ) 18:52, 16 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] new reviewer requested. viriditas ( talk ) 20:16, 20 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] overall : i do see the issues that the other reviewer mentioned. i can see where they are coming from but because this hook is not biomedical info it doesn't require as strict of sources. if i remember correctly, press releases can be used as rs if used cautiously. i think using a press release from a reliable society and the fact that is stating things that can be easily verified (as in the policy changes and that misinformation has played a role) makes it appropriate here. i do not think that the image is clear at 100px due to the legend. i would support this hook without the image. intentionally dense ( contribs ) 23:42, 24 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] new reviewer needed. viriditas ( talk ) 00:05, 25 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] about the image, could we proclaim " skill issue " and just crop the image to only a map and then make the caption "states with stricter bans are colored more red"? i'd prefer brevity, but we could also add " gender-affirming care " before "bans" and "and stronger shield laws more blue" to the end of that caption if needed. aaron liu ( talk ) 01:59, 25 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] cbl62 ( talk ) 13:54, 17 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] "in february 1942, after pearl harbor, japan arrow was renamed american arrow, to avoid any unfortunate association of ideas." https://www.aukevisser.nl/mobil/id636.htm "..as japan arrow (later renamed american arrow ).." https://www.history.navy.mil/content/history/nhhc/research/histories/ship-histories/danfs/c/chotauk.html created by phoenixcaelestis ( talk ) and ggotcc ( talk ). phoenixcaelestis • talk • contributions 11:39, 17 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] overall : overall a well-done article, and the hook citation issue can presumably be fixed quickly, but i am seriously concerned about whether "auke visser's mobil tankers & tugs site" is an wp:rs . a self-published source like would be acceptable if they were a subject matter expert , but i can't find any evidence of that. rusalkii ( talk ) 00:47, 20 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] @rusalkii: japan arrow has an entry in the dictionary of american naval fighting ships [ [10] ] that states that it was renamed in february 1942, however it does not specify the reason. due to the time period and the events, i do not think it is a stretch to say it was due to the fact that america was now at war with japan. i'd be willing to rephrase the hook to remove the quote. perhaps as, "that to avoid association with the enemy during world war ii , the name of the arrow -class oil tanker , ss japan arrow , was changed by the american government?" just a thought for a possible reword. thanks for taking the time to examine the dyk nomination! phoenixcaelestis • talk • contributions 19:42, 26 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] piotr konieczny aka prokonsul piotrus | reply here 03:10, 27 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] overall : i assume good faith on the references that i can't access. either hook works. sl93 ( talk ) 22:33, 31 march 2025 (utc) [ reply ] @ piotrus and sl93 : there is likely a more clear way to phrase alt1. jarvis (2017) says: in 1986, miroslaw lipinski, a polish american translator based in new york city, published a home-printed journal, the grabiński reader. it contained translations of two stories by the early twentieth-century polish writer of the fantastic, stefan grabiński: “the area” and “strabismus.” these were the first translations of grabiński’s work into english. over the next few years, lipinski published more grabiński translations in further issues of the grabiński reader and in small press anthologies. then, in 1993, lipinski’s grabiński translations were collected in the dark domain, published by uk-based independent press dedalus. so the stories had been previously published in what sounds like a zine. the dark domain was his first english-language anthology. and it was the first time his work was distributed by a publisher, versus the homemade journal/zine. i feel like there are a lot of ways to make what the book is more clear both in the hook and in the article. the article calls this " the first time grabiński's works were published in english " and then follows that up with footnote a giving the context above. it would be much more clear to write the article chronologically with the footnote worked into the body text. rjj iii ( talk ) 05:34, 17 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] 7kk ( talk ) 18:47, 30 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] makeandtoss ( talk ) 12:01, 24 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] tbj10rh ( talk ) 15:30, 31 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] "...that j.a. happ has started opening day for both minor league baseball and major league baseball 10 years apart?" tbj10rh ( talk ) 15:19, 31 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] 7kk ( talk ) 00:17, 31 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] overall : the article achieved ga status on 24 march, and nominated for dyk one week later. length is adequate. sourcing is good, but the infobox has a full birth date, whereas the citation in the prose in only for the year 1961. please clarify. the article is neutral in tone, and no plagiarism was detected. the proposed hook is interesting, but could be said in fewer words. the corresponding prose in the article that supports the hook needs a citation directly at the end, as per wp:dykhfc . no images are used in the article, and the qpq requirement is complete. overall, the article is well written and a welcome contribution to wikipedia. flibirigit ( talk ) 18:58, 5 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] known for his knack to spruce up buildings where he is posted, some of his colleagues recalled how mitra had been pivotal in the renovation of the traffic building in lalbazar, setting up the calcutta police traffic museum and re-decorating parts of bhabani bhavan during his stint at the state cid. someone who knows mitra from his younger days shared with metro how he had turned a boat seized with a large quantity of illicit liquor into a barb wire shelter for birds during his first posting as the sdpo barrackpore. another officer, who has done multiple assignments with mitra, said his speciality has been his “human touch for the force and his eye for their welfare”. as the superintendent of police in murshidabad, mitra has started several developmental and welfare projects —some for the constabulary and some for the development of backward pockets known for notorious activities. “he started the chandradip mela in hariharpara (one of the police station areas in murshidabad that was infamous of violence and ganglord killings) as an annual developmental project that changed the entire area,” said a senior officer in the force. the account 2 ( talk ) 22:10, 24 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] surtsicna ( talk ) 08:40, 28 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] laun chba ller 20:58, 26 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] antony– 22 ( talk ⁄ contribs ) 22:54, 30 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] okay, the 20,000 appears in an npr source used in the article. perhaps duplicate that one to the relevant locations? both articles are new enough and long enough. qpqs are done. the sourcing for the first paragraph of the background section is not entirely clear, i am unsure how to draw the conclusions of the first paragraph from them. the first sentence of the second paragraph seems true, although not explicit in the sources. the rest of that paragraph is fully supported. the third paragraph is also supported, although determining what the "order required" would be better with secondary sources. provisions similarly is mostly sourced to the primary announcement. this is a better use for a primary source, but there is still a bit of interpretation, for example the hss.gov announcement doesn't state that niosh is moving from the cdc (although it does say something is moving to the cdc). this seems like the sort of text that could use quotation marks to directly convey part of the primary document. the final bullet point has secondary sources, but is also not something covered in the original press release or its associated "fact sheet" (which is about the same length as the press release), which does suggest that the restructuring goes beyond the press release and so more sources would be helpful to analyze it. (i also tried to do a bit of searching to figure out what the current "28" divisions are, i was unable to find something clear in a quick look.) the "hhs is said" opinion should probably be attributed directly to kennedy. spotchecks in reduction in force subsection found no issues. on implementation, "the former being given extra time to scrutinize the firing plans" is not my reading of the source, which is light on details but might suggest it was the unilateral decision of the hhs officials rather than something they were given. i cannot find support for "some employees cited fears about political interference in health data" in its attached source. cmd ( talk ) 09:26, 21 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] this article is a bit short, especially as a lot of its current content is summaries of various agencies and departments. it is also very reliant on primary sources, especially outside of these summaries. however, it is only an announced agency, so more sourcing will likely become available with time, and given the length is a clear pass on the first article, i am inclined to pass this one on length alongside it. going back to the hook, another issue is that it is putting quite a lot of topics together: the reorganization, kennedy's slogan, the new administration, and the firings. it would be better to refine to a couple of key points with clear links. cmd ( talk ) 09:40, 21 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] regards, jeromi mikhael 07:03, 28 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] remember ( talk ) 02:24, 31 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] moondragon21 ( talk ) 10:09, 30 march 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] chchcheckit ( talk ) 11:42, 4 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] reviewer needed for the article and alt1.-- laun chba ller 16:29, 19 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] ~ l 🌸 ( talk ) 02:55, 2 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] mallardtv talk to me! 23:36, 6 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] phlsph7 ( talk ) 08:37, 4 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] verylongandmemorable ( talk ) 18:34, 3 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] dwkaminski ( talk ) 18:48, 2 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] counting prose characters without dykcheck you'll probably make a mistake trying to count this way, but you'll be close. use a free website, or an external software program that has a character-counting feature. for example, if you are using microsoft word, select the text from the article page (or, in the case of "did you know" nominations, the dyk talk page) – not the edit page containing wikitext – then copy and paste it into a blank document. delete everything dykcheck doesn't count: infoboxes, categories, references, lists, tables, block quotes, headers, images and captions, the "see also" section if any, table of contents, edit buttons, "citation needed" and similar superscripted text, and reference link numbers like [6]. click "tools" ("review" in office 2007), then "word count", and note the "characters (with spaces)" figure. i used the word count though and not character. give it quick fail. dwkaminski ( talk ) 20:02, 2 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] as the citations were mostly ripped off the jawiki version, i cannot put the text where the information came from. considering the article is ga in jawiki (meaning it has been reviewed), i am assuming all citations are correct. rusalkii provided me with a nice hook :) alphabetagamma ( talk/report any mistakes here ) 00:42, 5 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] phlsph7 ( talk ) 09:14, 4 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] laun chba ller 16:34, 12 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] mehedi abedin 06:13, 10 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] catchme ( talk · contribs ) 00:53, 6 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] rusalkii ( talk ) 21:52, 17 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] lullabying ( talk ) 09:07, 13 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] aaron liu ( talk ) 03:46, 7 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] flibirigit ( talk ) 23:26, 7 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] overall : i would prefer alt1 if we can find a rs which supports the statement; i find it more interesting. but i think alt0 is interesting enough. and a massive thank you for donating a second qpq to help the backlog! about the prose, aldred definitely had a storied career, and i think you did a great job capturing it in this bio :) house blaster ( talk • he/they) 20:40, 21 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] gerda arendt ( talk ) 10:20, 7 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] @ narutolovehinata5 : let me read this article over later tonight or maybe tomorrow afternoon. honestly, i don't think the quirkiness really comes through in the prolix alt0. — currytime7-24 ( talk ) 02:26, 9 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] @ narutolovehinata5 and gerda arendt : before this nomination can continue, i need to point out an issue with this article. while working to add new information, i discovered that the article conflates two related, but separate pieces of music: the easter cantata and the easter oratorio . the article appears to be about the latter, but the "history" is devoted solely to the former (and its secular model). if it's ok with gerda, i may need to substantially modify the "history" section. — currytime7-24 ( talk ) 19:05, 10 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] it's ga now -- gerda arendt ( talk ) 07:11, 13 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] alt0f ... that the 1738 easter oratorio recycled music from the 1725 shepherd cantata , the first known joint work produced by johann sebastian bach and his frequent collaborator picander ? -- laun chba ller 21:23, 15 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] back to work. after we missed the chance to point at this work on the anniversary we can of course say things unrelated to the anniversary. i gave it a rewrite, with better sourcing. pick what you like. most beautiful score. "no evangelist, no biblical text, no chorale" if you have to say what it is not. i should probably unwatch ;) -- gerda arendt ( talk ) 15:11, 22 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] srnec ( talk ) 23:09, 14 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] thriley ( talk ) 16:29, 13 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] beaniefan11 ( talk ) 23:21, 16 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] saluere, ɔþʱʏɾɪʊs ⚔ 19:50, 13 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] overall : dclemens1971 ( talk ) 16:38, 14 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] @ dclemens1971 ( talk ) thanks for reviewing this nomination. it's hard to change the language of the sentence as it represents the the information clearly and is a translation of the the information. as a sikh myself, i can assure that the similarity is a coincidence. still, to prevent a violation, i've fixed it to prevent the copyright violation. also, thanks for the source & i think that it would be better to change the hook. apologies for taking your time in this hook as this is my first nom. saluere, ɔþʱʏɾɪʊs ⚔ 09:33, 15 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] gregariousmadness ( talk to me! ) 23:12, 10 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] sammi brie (she/her · t · c ) 06:40, 10 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] there needs to be a community discussion on disclosed paid editors and dyk. i think it would be best to have a complete ban of paid articles on dyk rather than evaluating them on a case by case basis. brie is an exceptional editor with a long history. to make an exception for her but not other paid editors opens up too many potential time consuming discussions that would be avoided with a simple ban. thriley ( talk ) 15:56, 15 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] https://www.nytimes.com/1996/12/15/travel/weighing-the-ethics-of-a-trip.html tarheelbornbred ( talk ) 21:40, 9 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] zkevinthecat ( talk ) 18:58, 9 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] beaniefan11 ( talk ) 21:27, 11 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] thriley ( talk ) 05:10, 18 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] title - lions in the santa monica mountains "los angeles is one of only two megacities in the world (the other is mumbai) that have big cats living within the city limits." https://sentinelcolorado.com/uncategorized/big-cats-in-urban-jungle-la-mountain-lions-mumbai-leopards/ title - big cats in urban jungle: la mountain lions, mumbai leopards gb321 ( talk ) 04:25, 18 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] regards, jeromi mikhael 08:40, 14 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] epicgenius ( talk ) 18:21, 11 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] soman ( talk ) 11:00, 11 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] copyright stuff: earwig is spotless . random spot-checks of refs as of this revision : ref 7 is copyvio-free. it partially supports the rest of the sentence; there is no mention of local coverage. i am not seeing sourcing for pravda; agf that this comes from the part of ref 1 which i cannot access. ref 1 uses a and d are both plagiarism-free and check out, too. as for the hook, alt0 is great. i might even shorten it by removing followed soviet orthography and thus , which leaves the reader wanting to know "why", but that is completely up to you. and thank you for writing this article, especially making appropriate use of non-english sources :) house blaster ( talk • he/they) 18:04, 20 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] beaniefan11 ( talk ) 21:17, 19 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] geogsage ( ⚔chat?⚔ ) 02:40, 19 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] ミラp @ miraclepine 23:12, 15 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] srnec ( talk ) 23:33, 14 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] j i p | talk 09:03, 18 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] ミラp @ miraclepine 03:19, 16 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] shapeyness ( talk ) 11:15, 15 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] john cummings ( talk ) 09:07, 14 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] history6042😊 ( contact me ) 15:05, 13 april 2025 (utc). i like this hook very much; it is clever in its wordplay, and interesting. the article is of sufficient length and the source is reliable (as explained here ). it appears to be well written. for the reasons stated, i approve it. will thorpe ( talk ) 13:46, 20 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] mupper-san ( talk ) 04:34, 13 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] beaniefan11 ( talk ) 23:26, 21 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] beaniefan11 ( talk ) 18:01, 21 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] – rhain ☔ ( he/him ) 22:40, 14 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] (cc) tb hotch ™ 05:21, 14 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] drchriswilliams ( talk ) 04:07, 22 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] roy is war talk! 09:43, 20 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] lajmmoore ( talk ) 07:16, 16 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] isd ( talk ) 16:39, 15 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] generalissima ( talk ) (it/she) 00:51, 18 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] using the aquilegia micrantha review from the nomination. s am w alton ( talk ) 22:52, 16 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] fundy isles historian - j ( talk ) 19:08, 19 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] hawkeye7 (discuss) 22:34, 17 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] viljowf ( talk ) 18:31, 17 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] buysomeapples ( talk ) 10:48, 23 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] two 1969 sources from when the theatre opened, which are in the british newspaper archive (paywalled) https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000560/19690917/140/0017 eehalli ( talk ) 20:11, 22 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] jessica3801 ( talk ) 17:41, 21 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] blackballnz ( talk ) 04:10, 20 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] reidgreg ( talk ) 19:57, 18 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] deiadameian ( talk ) 18:57, 18 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] siawase ( talk ) 17:17, 18 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] ominae ( talk ) 06:39, 18 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] annwfwn ( talk ) 13:24, 22 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] overall : article looks good. my only concern is that it seems the only citation for the claim is from the website of the organization itself. are there any independent sources that mention this? beaniefan11 ( talk ) 00:27, 23 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] no swan so fine ( talk ) 22:39, 21 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] artemisiagentileschifan ( talk ) 13:14, 20 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] on another note: malacrianza killed juan carlos cubillo in an accidental fall : this sounds as though we're saying that the bull didn't mean for him to fall! i think we can take as read that the rider didn't mean to fall off. on a third note, the fair-use rationale requires that we show that reasonable efforts have been taken to track down any free-use image that may already exist, not simply that we can't currently go to costa rica and make one. undercoverclassicist t · c 17:20, 21 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] the doctor who (talk) 05:08, 23 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] onceinawhile ( talk ) 02:00, 21 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] mediakyle ( talk ) 17:19, 20 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] namelessposter ( talk ) 17:05, 20 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] — 👑 prince of erebor 📜 15:42, 20 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] will thorpe ( talk ) 13:47, 20 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] thatpb95 fan ( talk ) 11:04, 23 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] sammi brie (she/her · t · c ) 07:43, 22 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] rjj iii ( talk ) 06:02, 22 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] ~~ airshipjungleman29 ( talk ) 00:31, 22 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] the article notes: "in his efforts to transform stewed minced pork over rice into a signature taiwanese snack, chang studied the operations of fast-food leader mcdonald's closely. he came away deeply impressed by the industry giant's ability to run eateries that didn't have a greasy feel." the article notes: "1984年，麥當勞進軍台灣市場，為本土餐飲業帶來衝擊。張炎泉之子張永昌受此啟發，決心將家族事業現代化。他積極引進企業管理模式。1987年，「鬍鬚張速食有限公司」正式成立在北台灣各地開設分店。儘管在90年代，曾因口蹄疫受到影響，鬍鬚張仍是屹立不搖，持續在台紮根。" from google translate: "in 1984, mcdonald's entered the taiwanese market, bringing an impact to the local catering industry. inspired by this, chang yan-chuan's son chang yung-chang decided to modernise the family business. he actively introduced corporate management models. in 1987, "formosa chang fast food co., ltd." was officially established and opened branches throughout northern taiwan. although affected by foot-and-mouth disease in the 1990s, formosa chang still stands firm and continues to take root in taiwan." cunard ( talk ) 23:14, 21 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] olliefant (she/her) 20:41, 21 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] departure– ( talk ) 20:38, 21 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] regards, jeromi mikhael 20:09, 21 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] 2) i'm not sure whether naming the critic in the hook is ok as i think they are still alive (thinking of blp guidelines) lajmmoore ( talk ) 10:55, 21 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] lbal ( talk ) 06:18, 21 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] daniel cavallari ( talk ) 13:41, 23 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] hurstbergn ( talk ) 01:45, 23 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] valorrr ( lets chat ) 20:57, 22 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] pcn02wps ( talk | contribs ) 20:14, 22 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] lajmmoore ( talk ) 18:43, 22 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] soulbust ( talk ) 11:14, 22 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] "a total of 40 egg capsules of v. ebraea were found attached to the green calcareous alga udotia occidentalis a.gepp and e.s. gepp (fig. 1 a and b) in the same place that v. ebraea adults were found (1 to 2 meters depth in sea grass beds off paracurú beach, ceará state, brasil)." http://panamjas.org/pdf_artigos/panamjas_19(1)_41-45.pdf daniel cavallari ( talk ) 13:22, 23 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] warm regards , miminity ( talk? ) ( me contribs ) 04:40, 23 april 2025 (utc) . [ reply ] the holding area is near the top of the approved page . please only place approved templates there; do not place them below.

original file (1,797 × 2,381 pixels, file size: 1.82 mb, mime type: image/jpeg ) the wikimedia foundation has received an e-mail confirming that the copyright holder has approved publication under the terms mentioned on this page. this correspondence has been reviewed by a volunteer response team (vrt) member and stored in our permission archive . the correspondence is available to trusted volunteers as ticket #2014070110000717 . if you have questions about the archived correspondence, please use the vrt noticeboard . ticket link: https://ticket.wikimedia.org/otrs/index.pl?action=agentticketzoom&ticketnumber=2014070110000717 find other files from the same ticket: click on a date/time to view the file as it appeared at that time. this file contains additional information, probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. if the file has been modified from its original state, some details may not fully reflect the modified file.

on 22 april 2025, militants affiliated with the resistance front , an affiliate of pakistan-based lashkar-e-taiba and hizbul mujahideen , opened fire on a group of tourists at the baisaran valley in jammu and kashmir , india, and massacred at least 28 people and injured more than 20 others. an armed insurgency broke out in jammu and kashmir in 1989, and has been ongoing since, with violence having reduced significantly in recent years. in 2019, india revoked jammu and kashmir 's special status , dividing the state into two union territories — jammu and kashmir and ladakh . this move empowered local authorities to issue domicile status to people that did not earlier qualify, allowing them to buy land and obtain jobs in the disputed territory. on 10 april, the revenue minister revealed that 83,000 people have been issued domicile certificates under the new rules in the last two years. [ 7 ] [ 8 ] according to forbes, kashmir was already the most militarized zone in the world. [ 9 ] following the revocation of the region's limited autonomy, india began a massive crackdown . this led to a deterioration of relations with pakistan amid the kashmir dispute . india has permanently stationed an estimated 500,000 security personnel in the territory. [ 7 ] [ 10 ] the attack by four to six militants [ 11 ] occurred at around 14:50 on 22 april in the baisaran valley near pahalgam, a remote tourist spot accessible by foot or pony, in indian-administered kashmir. [ 12 ] the militants used m4 carbines and ak-47s . [ 1 ] the area was crowded with tourists enjoying improved weather after days of rain. according to survivors, gunmen in military-style uniforms emerged from nearby forests and opened fire on the crowd. [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] the attackers had asked for names and demanded that the victims recite the kalma . [ 16 ] they checked for circumcisions to identify and spare muslims , ensuring they were targeting non-muslims. [ 17 ] eyewitness videos showed scenes of panic and injured victims pleading for help. one woman was seen screaming for assistance for her husband, while others were seen lying motionless in the meadow. at least 28 people were killed, and several others were critically injured. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] emergency services arrived at the scene shortly after news of the attack reached district headquarters. two critically injured victims were taken to anantnag district hospital around 16:30, while others were transported to nearby medical centres. some were airlifted by helicopter to a military hospital in srinagar for further treatment. [ 14 ] locals also rescued and offered shelter to victims. members of local pony-handlers association rescued around 11 injured tourists on ponies and improvised stretchers. [ 20 ] a local woolen fabric trader guided four families of chhattisgarh out of the attack site to a safe place. [ 21 ] a family from maharashtra posted on social media to show their gratitude to a local cab driver who sheltered them in his house during the attack and ensured their well being. [ 22 ] witnesses stated that most of the victims were male, with one assailant allegedly telling a woman that she was being spared so she could "narrate the horrors" to prime minister narendra modi . several victims were shot at close range, and video footage from the scene showed bloodied individuals lying on the ground and others pleading for help. [ 23 ] a joint cordon and search operation involving local police and the indian army was launched in the area. helicopters were deployed to locate the attackers, and a temporary lockdown was imposed in parts of pahalgam. [ 24 ] [ 25 ] at least 28 civilians were killed in the attack, including 24 indian tourists from various parts of india, two locals from jammu and kashmir and two foreign tourists from nepal and the united arab emirates. [ 2 ] [ 26 ] at least 20 others were injured. [ 27 ] [ 28 ] the dead included those from karnataka , kerala , maharashtra , odisha , gujarat , haryana , west bengal and uttar pradesh , as well as injured from gujarat, tamil nadu and maharashtra. [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] the casualties included a 26-year-old indian navy officer and an intelligence bureau official. [ 32 ] [ 33 ] the attack was claimed by the resistance front , an affiliate of pakistan-based lashkar-e-taiba [ 34 ] and hizbul mujahideen [ 11 ] blaming the settlement of over 85,000 non-kashmiris that were driving a " demographic change." [ 31 ] [ 35 ] indian prime minister narendra modi cut short his visit to saudi arabia and said that those responsible would be brought to justice, emphasizing india's resolve to combat terrorism. [ 36 ] union home minister amit shah travelled to srinagar to assess the situation and coordinate the security response. union minister for finance and corporate affairs nirmala sitharaman cut short her official visit to the united states and peru. security forces launched a manhunt to apprehend the perpetrators, and a helpline was established to assist affected tourists. [ 37 ] on 23 april, the indian army gave limited clearance for the operation of hal dhruv for counter-terrorism operations. the fleet was otherwise grounded. [ 38 ] protests were held in many parts of indian-administered kashmir condemning the attack, including some in jammu who blamed pakistan. [ 31 ] the national investigation agency initiated an investigation into the attack after visiting the site on 23 april. [ 39 ] [ 40 ] security agencies released sketches of three of the militants involved in attack and stated that all of them were linked to lashkar-e-taiba and at least two are believed to be foreigners. [ 41 ] [ 42 ] intelligence agencies identified saifullah kasuri alias khalid, a top let commander, as the mastermind of the massacre. [ 43 ] the attack drew immediate widespread condemnation from political leaders and civil society. chief minister omar abdullah described the incident as "much larger than anything we've seen directed at civilians in recent years." president droupadi murmu expressed her condolences to the families of the victims and called it a "dastardly and inhuman act." [ 44 ] prime minister narendra modi condemned the act of violence and assured that those responsible for the attack would be brought to justice emphasizing the nation's strong resolve to combat terrorism. [ 45 ] and defence minister rajnath singh labeled it an "act of cowardice." [ 28 ] opposition congress mp priyanka gandhi called it a "crime against humanity." the leader of the opposition in lok sabha rahul gandhi described the attack as "horrific" and emphasised support for the victims, [ 2 ] while also criticising the bjp. as did the pdp. [ 46 ]

jammu [ b ] and kashmir [ c ] (abbreviated j&k ) is a region administered by india as a union territory [ 1 ] and consists of the southern portion of the larger kashmir region, which has been the subject of a dispute between india and pakistan since 1947 and between india and china since 1959. [ 3 ] the line of control separates jammu and kashmir from the pakistani-administered territories of azad kashmir and gilgit-baltistan in the west and north. it lies to the north of the indian states of himachal pradesh and punjab and to the west of ladakh which is administered by india as a union territory. [ 2 ] provisions for the formation of the union territory of jammu and kashmir were contained within the jammu and kashmir reorganization act, 2019 , which was passed by both houses of the parliament of india in august 2019. the act re-constituted the former state of jammu and kashmir into two union territories, one being jammu and kashmir and the other being ladakh, with effect from 31 october 2019. [ 19 ] jammu and kashmir is named after the two regions it encompasses – the jammu region and the kashmir valley . as per government of india , kashmir region encompasses the region under indian control and the territory under pakistan control known as "pakistan-occupied kashmir" (pok). [ 20 ] [ 21 ] while pakistan considers the indian controlled territory as a part of "indian-occupied kashmir" (iok) or "indian-held kashmir" (ihk), [ 22 ] [ 23 ] neutral sources use "indian-administered kashmir"/"pakistan-administered kashmir" and "indian-controlled kashmir"/"pakistan-controlled kashmir" to demarcate the areas. [ 24 ] the state of jammu and kashmir was accorded special status by article 370 of the constitution of india . in contrast to other states of india , jammu and kashmir had its own constitution , flag , and administrative autonomy. [ 25 ] indian citizens from other states were not allowed to purchase land or property in jammu and kashmir under article 35a of the constitution of india . [ 26 ] jammu and kashmir had three distinct areas: hindu-majority jammu region , muslim-majority kashmir valley , and buddhist-dominated ladakh . [ 27 ] unrest and violence persisted in the kashmiri valley and, following a disputed state election in 1987 , an insurgency persisted in protest over autonomy and rights. [ 27 ] [ 28 ] the bharatiya janata party (bjp) came to power in the 2014 indian general election and five years later included in their 2019 election manifesto the revocation of article 370 of the constitution of india, to bring jammu and kashmir to equal status with other states. [ 27 ] resolution to repeal article 370 was passed by both the houses of the parliament of india in august 2019. at the same time, a reorganisation act was also passed, which would reconstitute the state into two union territories, jammu and kashmir and ladakh , [ 29 ] while article 35a was also abolished through suspension of the presidential order of 1954. [ 30 ] the reorganisation took effect from 31 october 2019. [ 19 ] in september 2019, nearly 4,000 people, including two former chief ministers and hundreds of other politicians, were arrested by the indian authorities in kashmir; [ 31 ] the state was put under a lockdown and communication and internet services were suspended. [ 32 ] in april 2020, the government notified a domicile law to replace the previous 'permanent residents' scheme. under the new law, any one that resided in j&k for 15 years, or studied for 7 years and appeared for class 10 and class 12 exams in j&k would be deemed to be a 'domicile'. government officials that served in j&k for 10 years and their children also become eligible for domicile status. [ 33 ] in april 2025, it was revealed that over 83,000 people received domicile certificate under the new law who would not have qualified under the old laws. [ 34 ] on 11 december 2023, the supreme court of india unanimously upheld the abrogation of articles 370 and 35a, while also directing the union government to restore the statehood of jammu and kashmir and hold legislative assembly elections no later than september 2024. [ 35 ] [ 36 ] the first-ever assembly election for jammu and kashmir since its special status was revoked was held from september to october 2024, [ 37 ] with the alliance of jammu & kashmir national conference and indian national congress winning the majority of the seats [ 38 ] and omar abdullah becoming the chief minister . [ 39 ] jammu and kashmir is home to several valleys such as the kashmir valley, tawi valley, chenab valley , poonch valley, sind valley , and lidder valley . [ 40 ] the kashmir valley is 100 km (62 mi) wide and 15,520.3 km 2 (5,992.4 sq mi) in area. [ 41 ] the himalayas divide the kashmir valley from the tibetan plateau while the pir panjal range, which encloses the valley from the west and the south, separates it from the punjab plain of the indo-gangetic plain . [ 42 ] along the northeastern flank of the valley runs the main range of the himalayas. [ 43 ] this valley has an average height of 1,850 metres (6,070 ft) above sea-level, [ 41 ] but the surrounding pir panjal range has an average elevation of 10,000 feet (3,000 m). [ 44 ] the jhelum river is the major himalayan river which flows through the kashmir valley. [ 45 ] the southern jammu region is mostly mountainous, with the shivaliks , the middle and the great himalayas running parallel to each other in a southeast–northwest direction. a narrow southwestern strip constitutes fertile plains. the chenab , tawi and ravi are important rivers flowing through the jammu region. [ 46 ] the climate of jammu and kashmir varies with altitude and across regions. southern and southwestern areas have a sub tropical climate, with hot summers and cool winters. this region receives most of its rainfall during the monsoon season. in the east and north, summers are usually pleasant. the effect of the monsoon diminishes in areas lying to the leeward side of the pir panjal , such as the kashmir valley, and much of the rainfall happens in the spring season due to western disturbances . winters are cold, with temperatures reaching sub-zero levels. snowfall is common in the valley and the mountain areas. the union territory of jammu and kashmir consists of two divisions : jammu division and kashmir division , and is further divided into 20 districts . [ 47 ] jammu and kashmir has two major airports at the two capitals of the territory: jammu airport at jammu and srinagar airport at srinagar, which is also the only international airport in the territory. these airports have regular flights to delhi, mumbai, bangalore , chandigarh and other major cities of the country. the under-construction jammu-baramulla line of the northern railways is the only railway line in the territory. once complete, the line will connect the two regions of jammu and kashmir and will also provide a rail link to the kashmir valley from other parts of the country. the jammu–srinagar national highway , a segment of the nh44 , is the main highway in the territory connecting the two capitals by road. national highways 1, 144, 144a, 444, 501, 701 and 701a are the other nhs in the territory. as per the 2011 census, jammu and kashmir has a total population of 12,267,013. the sex ratio is 889 females per 1000 males. around 924,485 (7.54%) of the population is scheduled caste and 1,275,106 (10.39%) belong to the scheduled tribes , mainly gujjar , bakerwal , and gaddi . the scs are mostly concentrated in the jammu region. the region also has a minority christian community. muslims constitute the majority of the population of jammu and kashmir with a large hindu minority. [ 68 ] the kashmir division is predominantly muslim (96.41%) with a small hindu (2.45%) and sikh (0.81%) population. only 808 kashmiri hindu pandit families remain in the valley after their forced displacement by islamic militants. [ 69 ] shias are mostly concentrated in the budgam district , where they form about 30-40% of the population. [ 70 ] [ 71 ] the jammu division is predominantly hindu (67.5%) with a significant muslim population (30%). the muslims form a majority in the rajouri (63%), poonch (90%), doda (54%), kishtwar (58%) and ramban (71%) districts of jammu, while the hindus form a majority in kathua (88%), samba (86%), jammu (84%) and udhampur (88%) districts. reasi district has an almost equal number of hindus and muslims. [ 72 ] the dogras and various organisations of hindu-majority jammu region have demanded a separate state after bifurcation of the territory, on the basis of cultural, linguistic and religious differences from neighbouring kashmiris (who are predominantly muslim by faith). [ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] the most widely spoken language is kashmiri , the mother tongue of 53% of the population according to the 2011 census. kashmiri is primarily spoken in the kashmir valley and in the upper reaches of the chenab valley, with a sizeable number of speakers in jammu city. other major languages include dogri (20%), gojri (9.1%), pahari (7.8%), hindi (2.4%), punjabi (1.8%), [ 76 ] balti , bateri , bhadarwahi , brokskat , changthang , ladakhi , purik , sheikhgal , spiti bhoti , and zangskari . dogri , related to punjabi and pahari, is spoken throughout the plains areas of jammu division, as well as in parts of the hills. the hill people speak several languages. in the pir panjal range, bordering pakistan-administered kashmir, the main language is pahari-pothwari , a western variety of punjabi, as well as gojri , the language of the gujjar tribe. in the eastern hills of jammu division are spoken various western pahari languages such as siraji and bhaderwahi , which merge with the dialects of western himachal pradesh. [ 76 ] additionally, several other languages, predominantly found in neighbouring regions, are also spoken by communities within jammu and kashmir: bhattiyali , chambeali , churahi , gaddi , hindko , lahul lohar , pangwali , pattani , sansi , and shina . [ 77 ] urdu is also widely understood and spoken, particularly in the kashmir region where it acts as the lingua franca alongside kashmiri and also serves as a medium of instruction along with english , while hindi is taught and understood in the southern areas of jammu. [ citation needed ] according to the 2011 census, the literacy rate in jammu and kashmir was 67.17%, male literacy was 75%, while female literacy was at 56.43%. university of kashmir located in srinagar is the main university in the territory. other universities include university of jammu , sher-e-kashmir university of agricultural sciences and technology of kashmir , shri mata vaishno devi university , islamic university of science & technology , etc. major institutions of higher education are nit srinagar , iit jammu , iim jammu , nift srinagar and ihm srinagar. medical colleges include skims , and the government medical college in srinagar and all india institute of medical sciences, vijaypur, jammu . the union territory of jammu and kashmir is administered under the provisions of article 239 of the constitution of india . article 239a, originally formulated for the union territory of puduchery , is also applicable to jammu and kashmir. [ 78 ] the president of india appoints a lieutenant governor for the union territory. [ 78 ] a council of ministers led by a chief minister is appointed by the lieutenant governor from the membership of the legislative assembly. their role is to advise the lieutenant governor in the exercise of functions in matters under the jurisdiction of the legislative assembly. in other matters, the lieutenant governor is empowered to act in his own capacity. [ 78 ] omar abdullah has been chief minister of jammu and kashmir since october 2024. [ 5 ] the legislative branch of government is a unicameral legislative assembly , whose tenure is five years. the legislative assembly may make laws for any of the matters in the state list of the constitution of india except "public order" and "police", which will remain the preserve of the central government of india . the lieutenant governor also has the power to promulgate ordinances which have the same force as the acts of the legislative assembly. [ 78 ] elections for the jammu and kashmir legislative assembly were held in september and october 2024 . [ 79 ] the union territory is under the jurisdiction of the jammu and kashmir high court , which also serves as the high court for ladakh . [ 78 ] police services are provided by the jammu and kashmir police . [ 80 ] the main political parties active in the region are the jammu & kashmir national conference (leader: omar abdullah ) the jammu and kashmir people's democratic party (president: mehbooba mufti ) the bharatiya janata party (state president: sat paul sharma ), the indian national congress (state president: vikar rasool wani ), and the jammu and kashmir people's conference (president: sajjad gani lone ). other parties with a presence in the region include the communist party of india (marxist) , the jammu and kashmir national panthers party , and the jammu and kashmir apni party (president: altaf bukhari ). jammu and kashmir sends five members (mps) to the lower house of the indian parliament (the lok sabha ) and four members to the upper house (the rajya sabha ). jammu and kashmir's economy is primarily services-based and agriculture-oriented. [ 81 ] the gross domestic product of jammu and kashmir was estimated at ₹ 1.76 lakh crore (equivalent to ₹ 2.1 trillion or us$24 billion in 2023) in 2020–21. [ 82 ] in the fiscal year 2023–2024, it is expected that jammu and kashmir's gross domestic product (gdp) will exceed rs 2.30 lakh crore, with a growth rate of 10 per cent. [ 83 ] along with horticulture and agriculture , tourism is an important industry for jammu and kashmir, accounting for about 7% to its economy. [ 84 ] the kashmir valley is known for its sericulture and cold-water fisheries. [ 85 ] wood from kashmir is used to make high-quality cricket bats, popularly known as kashmir willow. [ 86 ] major agricultural exports from jammu and kashmir include apples, pears, cherries, plums, saffron and walnuts. [ 87 ] the traditional kashmiri handicrafts industry employs a large workforce of around 340 thousand artisans and has potential for producing export goods. [ 81 ] small-scale cottage industries include carpet weaving, silks, shawls, basketry, pottery, copper and silverware , papier-mâché and walnut wood . [ 81 ] the horticulture sector is the next biggest source of income in the economy. the temperature of jammu and kashmir is also suited to floriculture and can support various species of flora. [ 81 ] over 500 mineral blocks are present in jammu and kashmir, 261 of which are in the kashmir division alone. [ 88 ] kishtwar is known as the 'land of sapphire and saffron'. [ 89 ] resources such as timber, herbs and medicinal shrubs, edibles such as mushroom, chilgoza , black zeera , and saffron are available in the forests. [ 90 ] the sapphire reserve mines of machail, paddar are a source of mineral wealth. [ 90 ] jammu and kashmir is the only administrative unit in india with a large amount of borax and sapphire resources. [ 88 ] it possesses 36 per cent of the graphite, 21 per cent marble and 14 per cent of gypsum present in india. [ 88 ] coal, limestone and magnesite are found scattered among the different districts of the union territory. [ 88 ] other minerals of significance that occur are bauxite , ball clay and china clay in udhampur; bentonite in jammu; diaspore in rajouri and udhampur; graphite in baramulla; lignite and marble in kupwara; quartz and silica sand in anantnag, doda and udhampur; and quartzite in anantnag district. [ 88 ] in addition, the department of geology and mining has determined the presence of minerals such as magnetite , dolomite , fuel mineral, decorative building stones, slate, and gemstones. all are materials with commercial and industrial uses in many products and factories. [ 88 ] in the fiscal year 2019–20, total exports from jammu and kashmir amounted to ₹ 188.18 million (equivalent to ₹ 220 million or us$2.6 million in 2023). [ 81 ] the jammu & kashmir bank , which is listed as a nifty 500 conglomerate, is based in the union territory. [ 91 ] jammu and kashmir is one of the largest recipients of grants from the central government annually. [ 92 ] according to the sustainable development goals index 2021, 10.35 per cent of the population of jammu and kashmir live below the national poverty line, the third-highest among union territories in the country. [ 93 ] the apple industry is a significant source of employment in jammu and kashmir, generating the highest number of jobs. it provides approximately 400-man-days of work per year per hectare of orchards, supporting a workforce of 3.5 million people. moreover, it contributes approximately 10 per cent to the gross state domestic product (gsdp). in the year 2020–2021, the apple production in kashmir was reported to be 1,695,000.00 metric tonnes, while in the jammu division, it stood at 24,415.69 metric tonnes. the combined apple production for the entire union territory of jammu and kashmir amounted to 1,719,415.69 metric tonnes. notably, the kashmir valley is the primary contributor to these numbers, accounting for 75 per cent of india's total apple production and exporting around 1.8 million metric tonnes of apples annually. [ 94 ] the telecom regulatory authority of india (trai) regulates all major aspects pertaining to media and telecommunications in jammu and kashmir. [ 95 ] in addition, the jammu and kashmir administration released their media policy in 2020 which enabled government officers to sanction journalists and media organisations for disseminating " fake news ", and is valid for the next five years. [ 96 ] the policy attracted criticism for allegedly reducing people to "passive recipients of the information the government intends to disseminate." [ 97 ] the press council of india (pci) expressed concern over the provisions of fake news in the policy, as it "interferes with the free functioning of the press." [ 98 ] major periodicals in jammu and kashmir include greater kashmir , rising kashmir , kashmir times , daily excelsior , elite kashmir and kashmir monitor . [ 99 ] dd kashir is the state-owned television broadcaster. [ 100 ] popular private television channels are etv urdu and gulistan news. [ 101 ] in association with all india radio , dd kashir has established high power transmitters along the india–pakistan border . [ 102 ] radio sharda, a worldwide community radio service for kashmiri pandits , was started by ramesh hangloo. [ 103 ] fm tadka 95.0, big fm 92.7 , radio mirchi and red fm 93.5 are private fm radio stations. [ 104 ] internet shutdowns are frequent in jammu and kashmir. as of february 2021, the region had 300 internet shutdowns since 2012. in 2020 alone, this number was 115, the highest of any year. [ 105 ] sports tournaments in jammu and kashmir are organised by both the indian army and police, as well as mainstream political parties and the all parties hurriyat conference . [ 106 ] sportspersons who represent india in tournaments face stigmatisation from separatists. [ 106 ] jammu and kashmir has 18 stadiums, 23 training centres, three indoor sports complexes and 42 government-maintained playing fields. [ 107 ] srinagar is home to the sher-i-kashmir stadium , a stadium where international cricket matches have been played. [ 108 ] the maulana azad stadium in jammu is one of the home venues for the jammu and kashmir cricket team . [ 109 ] the bakshi stadium in srinagar, named after bakshi ghulam mohammad , hosts football matches. [ 110 ] institutions such as the jawahar institute of mountaineering and winter sports provides mountaineering, skiing and adventure courses. [ 111 ] the royal springs golf course, srinagar , located on the banks of dal lake , is considered one of the best golf courses in india. [ 112 ] jammu and kashmir was also host to the first khelo india winter games , held in 2020 in gulmarg. [ 113 ] jammu and kashmir came first with the most gold medals at 26, followed by the indian army team with 8 gold medals. [ 114 ] the second edition of the winter games were also held in gulmarg in 2021, with jammu and kashmir coming first again. [ 115 ] some major tourist attractions in jammu and kashmir are srinagar , the mughal gardens , gulmarg , pahalgam , patnitop , bhaderwah and jammu . every year, thousands of hindu pilgrims visit holy shrines of vaishno devi and amarnath which has had significant impact on the state's economy. [ 116 ] the kashmir valley is one of the top tourist destinations in india. [ 117 ] gulmarg , one of the most popular ski resort destinations in india, is also home to the world's highest green golf course . [ 118 ] the decrease in violence in the state has boosted the state's economy, specifically tourism. [ 119 ] jammu and kashmir is also famous for its scenery, flower gardens and apple farms. it attracts tourists for its unique handicrafts and the famous kashmir shawls . [ citation needed ]

pope francis [ b ] (born jorge mario bergoglio ; [ c ] 17 december 1936 – 21 april 2025) was the head of the catholic church and sovereign of the vatican city state from 2013 until his death in 2025 . he was the first pope from the society of jesus (the jesuit order), the first latin american , the first from the americas , the first from the southern hemisphere , and the first born or raised outside of europe since the 8th-century syrian pope gregory iii . born in buenos aires , argentina to a family of italian origin , bergoglio was inspired to join the jesuits in 1958 after recovering from severe illness. he was ordained a catholic priest in 1969, and from 1973 to 1979 he was the jesuit provincial superior in argentina. he became the archbishop of buenos aires in 1998 and was created a cardinal in 2001 by pope john paul ii . following the resignation of pope benedict xvi on 28 february 2013, a papal conclave elected bergoglio as his successor on 13 march. he chose francis as his papal name in honour of saint francis of assisi . throughout his public life, francis was noted for his humility, emphasis on god's mercy, international visibility as pope, concern for the poor, and commitment to interreligious dialogue . he was known for having a less formal approach to the papacy than his predecessors by, for instance, choosing to reside in the domus sanctae marthae (house of st. martha) guest house rather than in the papal apartments of the apostolic palace used by previous popes. [ 2 ] francis made women full members of dicasteries in the roman curia . [ 3 ] [ 4 ] he maintained that the catholic church should be more sympathetic towards lgbtq people, and stated that although blessings of same-sex unions are not permitted, the lgbtq individuals can be blessed as long as blessings are not given in a liturgical context. [ 5 ] francis was a critic of trickle-down economics , consumerism , and overdevelopment ; [ 6 ] he made action on climate change a leading focus of his papacy. [ 7 ] he viewed the death penalty as inadmissible in all cases, [ 8 ] and committed the catholic church to its worldwide abolition . [ 9 ] in international diplomacy, francis criticized the rise of right-wing populism , called for the decriminalization of homosexuality , [ 10 ] helped to restore full diplomatic relations between the united states and cuba , negotiated a deal with the people's republic of china to define communist party influence in appointing chinese bishops , and supported the cause of refugees . he encouraged peace between israel and palestinians, signed the vatican's first treaty with the state of palestine and condemned israel's military operations in gaza , calling for investigations of war crimes. he called protection of migrants a "duty of civilisation" and criticised anti-immigration politics, including those of u.s. president donald trump . [ 11 ] in 2022, he apologized for the church 's role in the cultural genocide of canadian indigenous peoples in residential schools . [ 12 ] francis convened the synod on synodality , which was described as the culmination of his papacy and the most important event in the catholic church since the second vatican council . [ 4 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] francis died at the age of 88 in the early morning of 21 april 2025, on easter monday , after suffering a celebral stroke , which led to coma and irreversible cardiac arrest . he had made his last public appearance the day before, on easter sunday. [ 15 ] [ 16 ] pope francis was born jorge mario bergoglio on 17 december 1936 [ 17 ] in flores , [ 18 ] a neighbourhood of buenos aires . [ 17 ] he was the eldest [ 19 ] of the five children of mario josé bergoglio and regina maría sívori. mario bergoglio was an italian immigrant and an accountant [ 20 ] from piedmont . [ 21 ] regina sívori [ 22 ] was a housewife born in buenos aires to a family of northern italian origin. [ 23 ] [ 24 ] mario bergoglio's family left italy in 1929 to escape the fascist rule of benito mussolini . [ 25 ] : 5 according to maría elena bergoglio, the pope's only living sibling, the family did not emigrate for economic reasons. [ 26 ] his other siblings were oscar adrián, marta regina, and alberto horacio. [ 27 ] [ 28 ] his niece, cristina bergoglio , is a painter based in madrid , spain. [ 29 ] [ 30 ] in the sixth grade, bergoglio attended wilfrid barón de los santos ángeles, a school of the salesians of don bosco in ramos mejía , buenos aires province. he then attended the technical secondary school escuela técnica industrial nº 27 hipólito yrigoyen [ 31 ] and graduated with a chemical technician's diploma. [ 17 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] in that capacity, he spent several years working in the food section of hickethier-bachmann laboratory [ 34 ] where he worked under esther ballestrino . earlier, he had been a bouncer and a janitor. [ 35 ] [ 36 ] when he was 21 years old, after life-threatening pneumonia and three cysts , bergoglio had part of a lung excised. [ 31 ] [ 37 ] while on his way to celebrate the spring day , bergoglio passed by a church to go to confession and was inspired by a priest. [ 38 ] he then studied at the archdiocesan seminary , inmaculada concepción seminary , in villa devoto , buenos aires, and, after three years, entered the society of jesus as a novice on 11 march 1958. [ 39 ] bergoglio said that, as a young seminarian, he had a crush on a girl and briefly doubted his religious career. [ 40 ] as a jesuit novice, he studied the humanities in santiago , chile. [ 41 ] after his novitiate, bergoglio officially became a jesuit on 12 march 1960 when he made the religious profession of the initial, perpetual vows of poverty, chastity and obedience of a member of the order. [ 42 ] [ 25 ] in 1960, bergoglio obtained a licentiate in philosophy from the colegio máximo de san josé . he then taught literature and psychology at the colegio de la inmaculada concepción, a high school in santa fe , from 1964 to 1965. in 1966, he taught the same courses at the colegio del salvador in buenos aires. [ 17 ] [ 43 ] in 1967, bergoglio began his theological studies at facultades de filosofía y teología de san miguel . on 13 december 1969, he was ordained a priest by archbishop ramón josé castellano . he served as the master of novices for the province there and became a professor of theology. [ 44 ] bergoglio completed his final stage of spiritual training as a jesuit, tertianship , at alcalá de henares , spain, and took final vows as a jesuit, including the fourth vow of obedience to missioning by the pope, on 22 april 1973. [ 25 ] he was named provincial superior of the society of jesus in argentina that july for a six-year term which ended in 1979. [ 17 ] [ 45 ] in 1973, he made a pilgrimage to jerusalem, but his stay was shortened by the outbreak of the yom kippur war . [ 46 ] after the completion of his term of office, he was named, in 1980, the rector of the philosophical and theological faculty of san miguel where he had studied. [ 47 ] before taking up this new appointment, he spent the first three months of 1980 in ireland to learn english, staying at the jesuit centre at the milltown institute of theology and philosophy , dublin. [ 48 ] he then served at san miguel for six years until 1986 [ 17 ] when, at the discretion of jesuit superior-general peter hans kolvenbach , he was replaced by someone more in tune with the worldwide trend in the society of jesus toward emphasizing social justice rather than his emphasis on popular religiosity and direct pastoral work. [ 49 ] bergoglio then spent several months at the sankt georgen graduate school of philosophy and theology in frankfurt, germany, and considered possible dissertation topics. [ 50 ] he settled on exploring the work of the german-italian theologian romano guardini , particularly his study of "contrast" published in his 1925 work der gegensatz . he returned to argentina earlier than expected to serve as a confessor and spiritual director to the jesuit community in córdoba . [ 51 ] as a student at the salesian school, bergoglio was mentored by ukrainian greek catholic priest stefan czmil . bergoglio often rose hours before his classmates to serve divine liturgy for czmil. [ 52 ] [ 53 ] in 1992, jesuit authorities asked bergoglio not to live in jesuit residences due to ongoing tensions with leaders and scholars; concerns about his "dissent", views on catholic orthodoxy, and opposition to liberation theology ; and his role as auxiliary bishop of buenos aires. [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 52 ] as a bishop, he was no longer subject to his jesuit superior. [ 56 ] from then on, he no longer visited jesuit houses and was in "virtual estrangement from the jesuits" until after his election as pope. [ 49 ] [ 54 ] bergoglio was named auxiliary bishop of buenos aires in 1992 and was consecrated on 27 june 1992 as titular bishop of auca , [ 17 ] [ 57 ] with cardinal antonio quarracino , archbishop of buenos aires, serving as principal consecrator. [ 58 ] he chose his episcopal motto to be miserando atque eligendo , [ 59 ] drawn from saint bede 's homily on matthew 9:9–13: "because he saw him through the eyes of mercy and chose him". [ 60 ] on 3 june 1997, bergoglio was appointed coadjutor archbishop of buenos aires, after which he became metropolitan archbishop after quarracino's death on 28 february 1998. as archbishop, he established new parishes, restructured the archdiocese, led pro-life efforts, and formed a commission on divorces. [ 17 ] [ 61 ] one of bergoglio's major initiatives as archbishop was to increase the church's presence in the shantytown ( villa miseria , or just villa ) slums of buenos aires. under his leadership, the number of priests assigned to work in the shantytowns doubled, and he visited them himself. [ 62 ] this work led to him being referred to as the " villero bishop", sometimes translated as the "slum bishop". [ 63 ] early in his tenure as archbishop, bergoglio sold the archdiocese's bank shares and moved its accounts to regular international banks. this ended the church's high spending habits, which had nearly led to bankruptcy, and enforced stricter fiscal discipline. [ 64 ] on 6 november 1998, while remaining archbishop of buenos aires, bergoglio was named ordinary for eastern catholics in argentina, who lacked a prelate of their own church. [ 58 ] on bergoglio's election to the papacy, major archbishop sviatoslav shevchuk said that bergoglio understood the liturgy, rites, and spirituality of shevchuk's ukrainian greek catholic church and always "took care of our church in argentina" as ordinary. [ 53 ] in 2000, bergoglio was the only church official to reconcile with jerónimo podestá , a former bishop who had been suspended as a priest after opposing the argentine revolution military dictatorship in 1972. he also defended podestá's wife from vatican attacks on their marriage. [ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] that same year, bergoglio said the argentine catholic church needed "to put on garments of public penance for the sins committed during the years of the dictatorship" in the 1970s, during the dirty war . [ 65 ] bergoglio regularly celebrated the holy thursday foot-washing ritual in jails, hospitals, retirement homes, and slums. [ 68 ] bergoglio continued to be the archbishop of buenos aires after his elevation to the cardinalate in 2001. in 2007, shortly after benedict xvi introduced new rules for pre-vatican ii liturgical forms, bergoglio established a weekly mass in this extraordinary form of the roman rite . [ 69 ] [ 70 ] on 8 november 2005, bergoglio was elected president of the argentine episcopal conference for a three-year term (2005–2008), [ 71 ] and re-elected on 11 november 2008. [ 72 ] he remained a member of that commission's permanent governing body, the president of its committee for the pontifical catholic university of argentina , and a member of its liturgy committee for the care of shrines. [ 58 ] while head of the argentine catholic bishops' conference, bergoglio issued a collective apology for his church's failure to protect people from the junta during the dirty war. [ 73 ] when he turned 75 in december 2011, bergoglio submitted his resignation as archbishop of buenos aires to pope benedict xvi as required by canon law . [ 46 ] as he had no coadjutor archbishop, he stayed in office, waiting for the vatican to appoint a replacement. [ 74 ] on 21 february 2001, pope john paul ii made archbishop bergoglio a cardinal , assigning him the title of cardinal priest of san roberto bellarmino . bergoglio was installed there on 14 october. during his trip to rome for the ceremony, he and his sister maría elena visited their father's hometown in northern italy. [ 26 ] as cardinal, bergoglio was appointed to five administrative positions in the roman curia . he was a member of the congregation for divine worship and the discipline of the sacraments ; the congregation for the clergy ; the congregation for institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life ; the pontifical council for the family ; and the commission for latin america . later that year, when cardinal edward egan returned to new york following the september 11 attacks , bergoglio replaced him as relator (recording secretary) in the synod of bishops , [ 75 ] and, according to the catholic herald , created "a favourable impression as a man open to communion and dialogue". [ 76 ] [ 77 ] cardinal bergoglio was known for his personal humility, doctrinal conservatism, and commitment to social justice . [ 78 ] his simple lifestyle , including living in a small apartment rather than the elegant bishop's residence, using public transportation, and cooking his own meals, enhanced his reputation for humility. [ 79 ] he limited his time in rome to "lightning visits". [ 80 ] after pope john paul ii died on 2 april 2005, bergoglio attended his funeral and was considered one of the papabile for succession to the papacy. [ 81 ] he participated as a cardinal elector in the 2005 papal conclave that elected pope benedict xvi. in the national catholic reporter , john l. allen jr. reported that bergoglio was a frontrunner in the 2005 conclave. [ 78 ] [ 82 ] in september 2005, the italian magazine limes published claims that bergoglio had been the runner-up and main challenger to cardinal ratzinger at that conclave and that he had received 40 votes in the third ballot but fell back to 26 at the fourth and decisive ballot. [ 83 ] [ 84 ] the claims were based on a diary purportedly belonging to an anonymous cardinal who had been present at the conclave. [ 83 ] [ 85 ] according to the italian journalist andrea tornielli , this number of votes had no precedent for a latin american papabile . [ 85 ] la stampa reported that bergoglio was in close contention with ratzinger during the election until he made an emotional plea that the cardinals should not vote for him. [ 86 ] according to tornielli, bergoglio made this request to prevent the conclave from delaying too much in the election of a pope. [ 87 ] as a cardinal, bergoglio was associated with communion and liberation , a catholic evangelical lay movement of the type known as associations of the faithful . [ 78 ] he sometimes made appearances at the annual gathering known as the rimini meeting held during the late summer months in italy. [ 78 ] in 2005, cardinal bergoglio authorized the request for beatification —the third step toward sainthood —for six members of the pallottine community murdered in the san patricio church massacre . [ 88 ] [ 89 ] bergoglio also ordered an investigation into the murders; [ 89 ] 1984 testimony indicated that they were perpetrated by members of the argentine navy on the orders of rear admiral rubén chamorro. [ 90 ] [ 91 ] bergoglio was the subject of allegations regarding the argentine navy 's kidnapping of two jesuit priests, orlando yorio and franz jalics , in 1976, during argentina's dirty war . after being tortured in captivity, the priests were found alive months later outside buenos aires, drugged and partially unclothed. [ 92 ] [ 81 ] bergoglio is widely reported to have failed to protect the priests, and to have dismissed them from the society of jesus days prior to their arrest. [ 93 ] in 2005, myriam bregman , a human rights lawyer, filed a criminal complaint against bergoglio, as superior in the society of jesus of argentina, accusing him of actual involvement in the kidnapping. [ 81 ] while the complaint was eventually dismissed, the debate over bergoglio's actions during the period has continued, with argentine journalists relying on documents and statements from both priests and laypeople in reporting that contradicts cardinal bergoglio's account. [ 93 ] yorio accused bergoglio of effectively handing them over to the death squads by declining to tell the authorities that he endorsed their work. yorio said in a 1999 interview that he believed that bergoglio did nothing "to free us, in fact just the opposite". [ 94 ] two days after the election of francis, jalics issued a statement confirming the kidnapping and attributing the cause to a former lay colleague who became a guerrilla, was captured, then named yorio and jalics when interrogated. [ 95 ] the following week, jalics issued a second, clarifying statement: "it is wrong to assert that our capture took place at the initiative of father bergoglio ... orlando yorio and i were not denounced by father bergoglio." [ 96 ] [ 97 ] bergoglio told his authorized biographer, sergio rubin , that he worked behind the scenes for the priests' release; bergoglio's intercession with dictator jorge rafael videla on their behalf may have saved their lives. [ 92 ] bergoglio also told rubin that he had often sheltered people from the dictatorship on church property, and once gave his own identity papers to a man who looked like him so that he could flee argentina. [ 92 ] the interview with rubin, reflected in the biography el jesuita , was the only time bergoglio had spoken to the press about those events. [ 98 ] alicia oliveira , a former argentine judge, also reported that bergoglio helped people flee argentina during the rule of the junta. [ 99 ] since francis became pope, gonzalo mosca [ 100 ] and josé caravias [ 101 ] have related accounts to journalists of how bergoglio helped them flee the dictatorship. oliveira described bergoglio as "anguished" and "very critical of the dictatorship" during the dirty war. [ 102 ] oliveira met with him at the time and urged bergoglio to speak out—he told her that "he couldn't. that it wasn't an easy thing to do." [ 94 ] artist and human rights activist adolfo pérez esquivel , the 1980 nobel peace prize laureate, said: "perhaps he didn't have the courage of other priests, but he never collaborated with the dictatorship... bergoglio was no accomplice of the dictatorship." [ 103 ] [ 104 ] graciela fernández meijide , member of the permanent assembly for human rights , also said that there was no proof linking bergoglio with the dictatorship. she told the clarín newspaper: there is no information and justice couldn't prove it. i was in the apdh during all the dictatorship years and i received hundreds of testimonies. bergoglio was never mentioned. it was the same in the conadep . nobody mentioned him as instigator or as anything. [ 105 ] ricardo lorenzetti , the president of the argentine supreme court, said that bergoglio was "completely innocent" of the accusations. [ 106 ] historian uki goñi pointed that, during early 1976, the military junta still had a good image among society, and that the scale of the political repression was not known until much later; bergoglio would have had little reason to suspect that the detention of yorio and jalics could end in their deaths. [ 107 ] fernando de la rúa replaced carlos menem as president of argentina in 1999. as an archbishop, bergoglio celebrated the annual mass at the buenos aires metropolitan cathedral on the first national government holiday, 25 may. [ 108 ] during argentina's economic depression , the catholic church criticized the government's austerity measures, which worsened poverty. de la rúa asked the church to facilitate dialogue between economic and political leaders to address the crisis. although he claimed to have spoken with bergoglio, bergoglio reportedly said the meeting was canceled due to a misunderstanding. bishop jorge casaretto had doubted this, noting that de la rúa made the request only in newspaper interviews, not formally to the church. [ 109 ] in the 2001 elections , the justicialist party won a majority in congress and appointed ramón puerta as senate president. bergoglio met with puerta and was positively impressed. puerta assured him that the justicialist party was not planning to oust de la rúa and promised to support the president in advancing necessary legislation. [ 110 ] during police repression of the riots of december 2001 , bergoglio contacted the ministry of the interior and asked that the police distinguish rioters and vandals from peaceful protesters. [ 111 ] when bergoglio celebrated mass at the cathedral for the 2004 first national government holiday, president néstor kirchner attended and heard bergoglio request more political dialogue, the rejection of intolerance, and the criticism of exhibitionism and strident announcements. [ 112 ] kirchner celebrated the national day elsewhere the following year and the mass in the cathedral was suspended. [ 113 ] in 2006, bergoglio helped the fellow jesuit joaquín piña win the elections in the misiones province and prevent an amendment of the local constitution that would allow indefinite re-elections. kirchner intended to use that project to start similar amendments at other provinces and eventually implement it in the national constitution. [ 114 ] kirchner considered bergoglio as a political rival until he died in 2010. [ 115 ] bergoglio's relations with kirchner's widow and successor, cristina fernández de kirchner , have been similarly tense. in 2008, bergoglio called for national reconciliation during disturbances in the country's agricultural regions, which the government interpreted as a support for anti-government demonstrators. [ 115 ] the campaign to enact same-sex marriage legislation was a particularly tense period in their relations. [ 115 ] when bergoglio was elected pope, initial reactions were mixed. most of the argentine society cheered it, but the pro-government newspaper página 12 published renewed allegations about the dirty war, and the president of the national library described a global conspiracy theory. the president took more than an hour before congratulating the new pope and did so only in a passing reference within a routine speech. due to the pope's popularity in argentina, cristina kirchner made what the political analyst claudio fantini called a " copernican shift " in her relations with him and fully embraced the francis phenomenon. [ 116 ] on the day before his inauguration as pope, bergoglio, now francis, had a private meeting with kirchner where they exchanged gifts and lunched together. this was the new pope's first meeting with a head of state, and there was speculation that the two were mending their relations. [ 117 ] [ 118 ] página 12 then removed their controversial articles about bergoglio from their web page as a result of this change. [ 119 ] before javier milei 's election to the argentine presidency, he was very critical of francis, describing him as "imbecile" and a "communist turd". his disparaging comments sparked controversy among catholics. [ 120 ] however, following his inauguration, milei softened his position and formally invited francis to argentina. milei visited the vatican on 11 february 2024, the day francis canonized maría antonia de paz y figueroa , the first female argentine saint. [ 121 ] francis was the first jesuit pope. this was a significant appointment because of the sometimes tense relations between the society of jesus and the holy see . [ 125 ] he was also the first from the americas, [ 126 ] and the first from the southern hemisphere . [ 127 ] many media reported him as being the first non-european pope, but he was the 11th; the previous was gregory iii from syria who died in 741. although francis was not born in europe, he was ethnically european ; his father and maternal grandparents were from northern italy. [ 128 ] as pope, francis's manner was less formal than that of his immediate predecessors, a style that news coverage referred to as "no frills", noting that it was "his common touch and accessibility that is proving the greatest inspiration". [ 129 ] on the night of his election, he took a bus back to his hotel with the cardinals rather than being driven in the papal car. [ 130 ] the next day, he visited cardinal jorge maría mejía in the hospital and chatted with patients and staff. [ 131 ] in addition to his native spanish, he spoke fluent italian (the official language of vatican city and the "everyday language" of the holy see) and german. he was also conversant in latin (the official language of the holy see), [ 132 ] french, [ 133 ] portuguese, [ 134 ] and english; [ 135 ] [ 136 ] he also understood piedmontese and some genoese ligurian . [ 137 ] francis chose not to live in the official papal residence in the apostolic palace but instead remained in the vatican guest house in a suite in which he received visitors and held meetings. he was the first pope since pope pius x to live outside the papal apartments. [ 138 ] francis appeared at the window of the apostolic palace for the sunday angelus . [ 139 ] as a jesuit pope, francis made clear that a fundamental task of the faithful is not so much to follow rules but to discern what god is calling them to do. he altered the culture of the clergy, steering away from what he named "clericalism" (which dwells on priestly status and authority) and toward an ethic of service (francis says the church's shepherds must have the "smell of the sheep", always staying close to the people of god). [ 140 ] bergoglio was elected pope on 13 march 2013, [ 17 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] the second day of the 2013 papal conclave , after which he took the papal name francis. [ 17 ] [ 143 ] francis was elected on the fifth ballot. [ 144 ] the habemus papam announcement was delivered by the cardinal protodeacon , jean-louis tauran . [ 145 ] cardinal christoph schönborn later said that bergoglio was elected following two supernatural signs, one in the conclave—and hence confidential—and one from a latin-american couple, friends of schönborn at vatican city, who whispered bergoglio's name in the elector's ear; schönborn commented "if these people say bergoglio, that's an indication of the holy spirit". [ 146 ] instead of accepting his cardinals' congratulations while seated on the papal throne , francis received them standing, reportedly an immediate sign of a changing approach to formalities at the vatican. [ 147 ] during his first appearance as pontiff on the balcony of saint peter's basilica , he wore a white cassock , instead of the red, ermine-trimmed mozzetta [ 147 ] [ 148 ] used by previous popes. [ 149 ] he also wore the same iron pectoral cross that he had worn as archbishop of buenos aires, rather than the gold one worn by his predecessors. [ 148 ] after being elected and choosing his name, his first act was bestowing the urbi et orbi blessing on thousands of pilgrims gathered in st. peter's square . before blessing the crowd, he asked those in st. peter's square to pray for his predecessor, "the bishop emeritus of rome" pope benedict xvi, and for himself as the new "bishop of rome". [ 150 ] francis held his papal inauguration on 19 march 2013 in st. peter's square. [ 17 ] he celebrated mass in the presence of political and religious leaders from around the world. [ 151 ] in his homily, francis focused on the solemnity of saint joseph , the liturgical day on which the mass was celebrated. [ 152 ] at his first audience on 16 march 2013, francis told journalists that he had chosen the name in honour of saint francis of assisi and had done so because he was especially concerned for the well-being of the poor. [ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] he explained that, as it was becoming clear during the conclave voting that he would be elected, the brazilian cardinal cláudio hummes had embraced him and whispered, "don't forget the poor", which made bergoglio think of the saint. [ 156 ] [ 157 ] bergoglio had previously expressed his admiration for st. francis, explaining that: "he brought to christianity an idea of poverty against the luxury, pride, vanity of the civil and ecclesiastical powers of the time. he changed history." [ 158 ] it was the first time that a pope had been named "francis". on the day of his election, the vatican clarified that his official papal name was "francis" and not "francis i", i.e. no regnal number is used for him. his name would become francis i if and when there is a francis ii. [ 154 ] [ 159 ] therewith, it remains the first time since lando 's 913–914 pontificate that a canonical pope holds a name not used by a predecessor. [ d ] francis also said that some cardinal electors had jokingly suggested to him that he should choose either "adrian", since adrian vi had been a reformer of the church, or "clement", to settle the score with clement xiv who had suppressed the jesuit order . [ 161 ] [ 162 ] bergoglio, had he been elected in 2005, would have chosen the pontifical name of "john xxiv" in honour of john xxiii . he told cardinal francesco marchisano : "john, i would have called myself john, like the good pope; i would have been completely inspired by him." [ 163 ] francis abolished the bonuses paid to vatican employees upon the election of a new pope, amounting to several million euros, opting instead to donate the money to charity. [ 164 ] he also abolished the €25,000 annual bonus paid to the cardinals serving on the board of supervisors for the vatican bank . [ 165 ] on 13 april 2013, francis named eight cardinals to a new council of cardinal advisers to advise him on revising the organizational structure of the roman curia. the group included several known critics of vatican operations and only one member of the curia. [ 166 ] [ 167 ] on the first holy thursday following his election, francis washed and kissed the feet of ten male and two female juvenile offenders imprisoned at rome's casal del marmo detention facility, telling them the ritual of foot washing is a sign that he is at their service. [ 168 ] this was the first time that a pope had included women in this ritual, although he had already done so when he was archbishop. [ 168 ] one of the male and one of the female prisoners were muslim . [ 168 ] on 31 march 2013, francis used his first easter homily to make a plea for world peace , specifically mentioning the middle east, africa, and north and south korea. [ 169 ] he also spoke out against those who give in to "easy gain" in a world filled with greed and made a plea for humanity to become a better guardian of creation by protecting the environment. [ 169 ] [ 136 ] although the vatican had prepared greetings in 65 languages, francis chose not to read them. [ 136 ] according to the vatican, the pope "at least for now, feels at ease using italian". [ 170 ] in 2013, francis initially reaffirmed the congregation for the doctrine of the faith 's programme to reform the u.s. leadership conference of women religious [ 171 ] which had been initiated under his predecessor, pope benedict xvi. the new york times reported that the vatican had formed the opinion in 2012 that the sisters ' group had some feminist influences, focused too much on ending social and economic injustice and not enough on stopping abortion, and permitted speakers who questioned church doctrine. [ 172 ] [ 171 ] in april 2015 the investigation was brought to a close. while the timing of the closure may have anticipated a visit by francis to the u.s. in september 2015, it was noted that the sisters' emphasis is close to that of francis. [ 173 ] francis oversaw synods on the family (2014), on youth (2018), and on the church in the amazon region (2019). in 2019 francis's apostolic constitution episcopalis communio allowed that the final document of a synod may become magisterial teaching simply with papal approval. the constitution also allowed for laity to contribute input directly to the synod's secretary general. [ 174 ] some analysts see the creation of a truly synodal church as likely to become the greatest contribution of francis's papacy. [ 175 ] on 4 october 2023, francis convened the beginnings of the synod on synodality , described by some as the culmination of his papacy and one of the most important events in the church since the second vatican council . [ 13 ] [ 14 ] in the first months of francis's papacy, the institute for the works of religion , informally known as the vatican bank, said that it would become more transparent in its financial dealings. [ 176 ] there had long been allegations of corruption and money laundering connected with the bank. [ 177 ] [ 178 ] francis appointed a commission to advise him about reform of the bank, [ 177 ] [ 178 ] and the finance consulting firm promontory financial group was assigned to carry out a comprehensive investigation of all customer contacts. [ 179 ] in january 2014, francis replaced four of the five cardinal overseers of the vatican bank who had been confirmed in their positions in the final days of benedict xvi's papacy. [ 180 ] lay experts and clerics were looking into how the bank was run. ernst von freyberg was put in charge. moneyval felt more reform was needed, and francis showed some willingness to close the bank if the reforms proved too difficult. [ 181 ] there was uncertainty how far reforms can succeed. [ 182 ] pope francis wrote a variety of books, encyclicals , and other texts, including a memoir, hope . [ 183 ] on 29 june 2013, francis published the encyclical lumen fidei , which was largely the work of benedict xvi but awaited a final draft at his retirement. [ 184 ] on 24 november 2013, francis published his first major letter as pope, the apostolic exhortation evangelii gaudium , [ 185 ] which he described as the programmatic of his papacy. [ 186 ] on 18 june 2015, he published his first own encyclical laudato si' concerning care for the planet. [ 187 ] on 8 april 2016, francis published his second apostolic exhortation, amoris laetitia , [ 188 ] remarking on love within the family. controversy arose at the end of 2016 when four cardinals formally asked francis for clarifications, particularly on the issue of giving communion to divorced and civilly remarried catholics. [ 189 ] a further apostolic exhortation, gaudete et exsultate ( rejoice and be glad ), was published on 19 march 2018, dealing with "the call to holiness " for all persons. he counters contemporary versions of the gnostic and pelagian heresies and describes how jesus's beatitudes call people to "go against the flow". [ 190 ] in february 2019, francis acknowledged that priests and bishops were sexually abusing religious sisters . [ 191 ] he addressed this and the clergy sex abuse scandal by convening a summit on clergy sexual abuse in february 2019. [ 192 ] as a follow-up to that summit, on 9 may 2019 francis promulgated the motu proprio vos estis lux mundi which specified responsibilities, including reporting directly to the holy see on bishops and on one's superior, while simultaneously involving another bishop in the archdiocese of the accused bishop. [ 193 ] on 4 october 2020, francis published the encyclical fratelli tutti on fraternity and social friendship. [ 194 ] on 8 december 2020, on the feast of the immaculate conception , pope francis published the apostolic letter patris corde ("with a father's heart"). [ 195 ] to mark the occasion, the pope proclaimed a "year of saint joseph" from 8 december 2020 to 8 december 2021 on the 150th anniversary of the proclamation of saint joseph as patron of the universal church . [ 196 ] on 1 june 2021, francis published the apostolic constitution pascite gregem dei . the document reformed vatican penal law by strengthening the penalties for sexual abuse and financial crimes; it also more harshly punished the ordination of women. [ 197 ] pope francis upheld the second vatican council's tradition by promoting ecumenism with other christian denominations , encouraging dialogue with other religions, and supporting peace with secular individuals. [ 198 ] in january 2014, francis said that he would appoint fewer monsignors and only assign those honoured to the lowest of the three surviving ranks of monsignor, chaplain of his holiness ; it would be awarded only to diocesan priests at least 65 years old. as archbishop of buenos aires, francis never sought the title for any of his priests. it is believed he associated it with clerical careerism and hierarchy, although he did not apply this restriction to clergy working in the roman curia or diplomatic corps where careerism is an even greater concern. [ 199 ] francis presided over the first canonizations of his pontificate on 12 may 2013 in which he canonized the martyrs of otranto —antonio primaldo and his 812 companions who had been executed by the ottomans in 1480 [ 200 ] —as well as the religious sisters laura of st. catherine of siena and maría guadalupe garcía zavala . [ 201 ] in this first canonization, francis surpassed the record of pope john paul ii in canonizing the most saints in a pontificate. [ 202 ] saints the pope canonized include louis martin and marie-azélie guérin (the first married couple to be named as saints together), [ 203 ] mother teresa , [ 204 ] and óscar romero . [ 205 ] francis canonized three of his predecessors: john xxiii, john paul ii and paul vi. [ 206 ] [ 205 ] francis also confirmed pope john paul i to be venerable [ 207 ] and blessed . [ 208 ] francis declared two new doctors of the church : saint gregory of narek in 2015, [ 209 ] and saint irenaeus of lyon in 2022. [ 210 ] francis created 163 cardinals from 76 countries across ten consistories . he held his first consistory in february 2014, a rare occasion in which he publicly appeared with his predecessor, benedict xvi. [ 211 ] [ 212 ] after the 2024 consistory, 110 cardinals appointed by francis were under the age of 80 and thus eligible to vote at a papal conclave . there were, at that point, 110 cardinal-electors created by francis, 24 created by benedict xvi, and six created by john paul ii. [ 213 ] francis's appointments made the college of cardinals less european-dominated. [ 214 ] he appointed many cardinals from developing countries , including some of the world's poorest, and from countries on the peripheries of the church. [ 215 ] compared to his predecessors, francis made fewer appointments of roman curia officials to the cardinalate. [ 215 ] this was part of a general trend under francis to a more decentralized church. [ 216 ] compared to his predecessor benedict, who preferred to appoint academically inclined churchmen as cardinal, francis favoured cardinals with a more pastoral focus, [ 215 ] especially those known for a focus on the poor and marginalized. [ 217 ] francis also dropped the traditional custom of always appointing the archbishops of certain historically prominent sees (such as the patriarch of venice and archbishop of milan ) as cardinals. [ 215 ] in his april 2015 papal bull of indiction, misericordiae vultus ("the face of mercy "), francis inaugurated a special jubilee year of mercy to run from 8 december 2015, solemnity of the immaculate conception of the blessed virgin mary , to the last sunday before advent and the solemnity of the feast of christ the king of the universe on 20 november 2016. [ citation needed ] the holy doors of the major basilicas of rome were opened, and special "doors of mercy" were opened at cathedrals and other major churches around the world, where the faithful could earn indulgences by fulfilling the usual conditions of prayer for the pope's intentions, confession, and detachment from sin, and communion. [ 218 ] [ 219 ] during lent of that year, special 24-hour penance services were celebrated, and during the year, special qualified and experienced priests called "missionaries of mercy" were available in every diocese to forgive even severe, special-case sins normally reserved to the holy see's apostolic penitentiary . [ 220 ] [ 221 ] francis established the world day of the poor in his apostolic letter, misericordia et misera , issued on 20 november 2016 to celebrate the end of the extraordinary jubilee of mercy. [ 222 ] [ 223 ] during the covid-19 pandemic , francis cancelled his regular general audiences at st. peter's square to keep crowds from gathering and spreading the virus, which had seriously affected italy . [ 224 ] he encouraged priests to visit patients and health workers; [ 225 ] urged the faithful not to forget the poor during the time of crisis; [ 226 ] offered prayers for people with the virus in china; [ 227 ] and invoked the blessed virgin mary under her title salus populi romani , as the diocese of rome observed a period of prayer and fasting in recognition of the victims. [ 228 ] the pontiff reacted with displeasure on 13 march 2020 to the news that the vicar general had closed all churches in the diocese of rome. despite italy being under a quarantine lockdown , francis pleaded "not to leave the ... people alone" and worked to partially reverse the closures. [ 229 ] on 20 march 2020, francis asked the dicastery for promoting integral human development (dpihd) to create a vatican covid-19 commission to listen to concerns and develop responses for the future. [ 230 ] [ 231 ] on 27 march, francis gave an extraordinary benediction urbi et orbi . [ 232 ] in his homily on calming the storm in the gospel of mark , francis described the setting: dense darkness has thickened on our squares, streets and cities; it looks over our lives filling everything with a deafening silence and a desolate void that paralyzes everything in its passage: you can feel it in the air, you can feel it in your gestures. ...in the face of suffering, where the true development of our peoples is measured, we discover and experience the priestly prayer of jesus: 'may all be one'. [ 233 ] francis maintained that getting covid vaccination was a moral obligation. [ 234 ] in response to the economic harm caused by the covid-19 pandemic , francis said that it was the time to consider implementing a universal basic wage . [ 235 ] francis committed the catholic church to support worldwide abolition of the death penalty . [ 236 ] in 2018, francis revised the catechism of the catholic church to read that "in the light of the gospel " the death penalty is "inadmissible because it is an attack on the inviolability and dignity of the person " and that the catholic church "works with determination for its abolition worldwide". [ 236 ] [ 237 ] in his 2020 encyclical fratelli tutti , francis repeated that the death penalty was "inadmissible", and that "there can be no stepping back from this position." [ 194 ] on 9 january 2022, francis stated in his annual speech to vatican ambassadors: "the death penalty cannot be employed for a purported state justice, since it does not constitute a deterrent nor render justice to victims, but only fuels the thirst for vengeance." [ 238 ] francis categorically rejected the ordination of women as priests. [ 13 ] early in his papacy, he initiated dialogue on the possibility of deaconesses , creating in 2016 a study commission on the women's diaconate to research the role of female deacons in early christianity. [ 239 ] its report was not made public, [ 240 ] but francis said in 2019 that the commission was unable to come to a consensus. [ 241 ] in april 2020, francis empaneled a new commission, led by cardinal giuseppe petrocchi with a new membership, to study the issue. [ 242 ] francis delayed a decision on the issue for several years. [ 13 ] in interviews in late 2023 and 2024, he appeared to reject the idea of women deacons, saying that " holy orders is reserved for men." [ 243 ] [ 240 ] francis said that "the fact that the woman does not access ministerial life is not a deprivation, because her place is much more important" [ 243 ] and that women had a charism separate from "the ministerial way." [ 240 ] in january 2021, francis issued spiritus domini , allowing bishops to institute women to the ministries of acolyte and lector . while these instituted ministries were previously reserved to men, catholic women already carried out these duties without institution in most of the world. francis wrote that these ministries are fundamentally distinct from those reserved to ordained clergy. [ 244 ] [ 245 ] [ 246 ] the following month, francis appointed women to several positions previously held only by men: a french member of the xaviere missionary sisters , nathalie becquart , was appointed co-undersecretary of the synod of bishops , and italian magistrate catia summaria became the first woman promoter of justice in the vatican's court of appeals. [ 247 ] in april 2023, francis announced that 35 women would be allowed to vote at the sixteenth ordinary general assembly of the synod of bishops ("just over 10%" of all voters), [ 248 ] marking the first time women are allowed to vote at any catholic synod of bishops. [ 249 ] francis was mandated by electing cardinals to sort out vatican finances following scandals during the papacies of pope benedict and pope john paul ii. he stated he was determined to end corruption in the catholic church but was not very optimistic due to it being a human problem dating back centuries. [ 250 ] early in 2022, francis expressed "shame and sorrow" for the catholic church's role in abuses against the indigenous peoples in canada . [ 251 ] late, in july 2022, francis made an apostolic journey to canada , where he expressed sorrow, indignation, and shame over the church's abuse of canadian indigenous children in residential schools . [ 252 ] francis described the canadian catholic church 's role as a " cultural genocide ." [ 12 ] he apologized for the church's role in "projects of cultural destruction" and forced assimilation . [ 252 ] near the former ermineskin indian residential school, the site of a search for unmarked graves , francis said: "i humbly beg forgiveness for the evil committed by so many christians against the indigenous peoples." [ 251 ] he visited the ermineskin cree nation 's cemetery at its maskwacis reserve . [ 251 ] francis promised a serious investigation into the history of abuse. [ 252 ] in 2010, then-cardinal bergoglio commissioned a study which concluded that father julio césar grassi , a priest convicted of child sexual abuse, was innocent, that his victims were lying, and that the case against him never should have gone to trial. [ 253 ] however, the supreme court of argentina upheld the conviction and prison sentence against grassi in march 2017. [ 253 ] early in his papacy, francis chose a more lenient sentence for mauro inzoli, an italian priest accused of child sexual abuse. [ 254 ] a church tribunal had ruled that inzoli should be laicized (defrocked), [ 255 ] and he was defrocked in 2012 by francis's predecessor benedict. [ 254 ] francis, however, reversed this decision in 2014; francis agreed with the bishop of crema that inzoli should remain a priest but be removed from public ministry and ordered to retire to "a life of prayer and humble discretion." [ 254 ] [ 255 ] inzoli was convicted of sexually abusing children in italian civil court in 2016, and sentenced to prison. [ 254 ] in unscripted remarks to the pontifical commission for the protection of minors in september 2017, francis admitted that he mishandled the inzoli case, saying that as a new pope, "i did not understand these things well and chose the more benevolent of the two sentences but after two years the priest had a relapse. i learned from this." [ 255 ] in the same remarks, he commented that the church "arrived late" in dealing with sexual abuse cases. [ 255 ] in 2015, francis was criticized for supporting chilean bishop juan barros who was accused of covering up catholic church sexual abuse cases in chile , including crimes committed against minors. [ 256 ] in 2018, francis acknowledged he had made "grave errors" in judgement about barros, apologized to the victims and launched a vatican investigation that resulted in the resignation of three chilean bishops: barros, gonzalo duarte , and cristián caro . [ 257 ] in 2019, francis defrocked theodore mccarrick , a former archbishop of washington , who maintained a prominent position in the church for decades despite repeated reports of sexual misconduct against him dating back to the 1980s. in 2017, after renewed allegations against mccarrick, francis commissioned a vatican investigation, which found that mccarrick had sexually molested both adults and minors. [ 258 ] in july 2018, mccarrick resigned from the college of cardinals ; in october 2018, francis ordered a review of the church's "institutional knowledge and decision-making" related to mccarrick. [ 259 ] francis authorized the release, in november 2020, of the report of the vatican's two-year investigation into mccarrick's career. [ 259 ] [ 258 ] the report largely faulted pope john paul ii , who appointed mccarrick as archbishop in 2000 and accepted the churchman's denials of sexual abuse, despite multiple reports. [ 258 ] the report also found that pope benedict xvi placed informal restrictions on mccarrick, but these were never enforced, and benedict did not investigate or formally sanction mccarrick even after he disregarded those restrictions. [ 258 ] the report concluded that francis, before 2017, "had heard only that there had been allegations and rumors related to immoral conduct with adults occurring prior to mccarrick's appointment to washington" and continued the approach of his predecessors john paul and benedict. [ 258 ] francis convened a summit on sexual abuse in february 2019, organized by hans zollner ; some abuse survivors expressed disappointment that the summit did not result in concrete rules on abuse prevention, responses to abuse, and church cooperation with law enforcement authorities. [ 260 ] in december 2019, francis abolished the " pontifical secrecy " privilege in sexual abuse cases, clarifying that bishops do not need authorization from the vatican to turn over to materials from canonical trials upon request of civil law enforcement authorities. [ 197 ] [ 261 ] the lifting of the confidentiality rule was praised by victim advocates, but did not require the church to affirmatively turn over canonical documents to civil authorities. [ 197 ] [ 261 ] in november 2021, francis thanked journalists for their work in uncovering child sexual abuse scandals in the church. he also thanked journalists for "helping us not to sweep it under the carpet, and for the voice you have given to the abuse victims". [ 262 ] in november 2022, french cardinal jean-pierre ricard admitted to having sexually abused a 14-year-old girl in the 1980s in marseille . [ 263 ] french authorities opened an investigation into the case while francis commented that now that "everything is clearer [...] more cases like this shouldn't surprise [anyone]", and condemned sexual abuse as "against priestly nature, and also against social nature". [ 264 ] [ 265 ] francis did not deprive ricard of his status and privileges as a cardinal. [ 266 ] francis visited ireland in 2018 , marking the first papal tour of the country since john paul ii's historic trip in 1979 . [ 267 ] he apologized for sexual abuses by clergy in the united states and ireland. [ 268 ] the case of slovenian priest marko rupnik , accused of psychological, spiritual, and sexual abuse against multiple women, including nuns, drew significant controversy due to the vatican's handling of the allegations. [ 269 ] initially, the dicastery for the doctrine of the faith (ddf) declined to prosecute, citing the statute of limitations, despite acknowledging there was a case to answer. [ 270 ] rupnik was expelled from the society of jesus in 2023 for disobedience rather than for the abuse allegations and was later incardinated into the diocese of koper . following widespread public outcry, pope francis ordered the case to be reopened and re-examined. after his conviction, rupnik preached in 2020 a lenten meditation for priests working in the roman curia , including pope francis and luis ladaria ferrer , and met privately with pope francis in january 2022. [ 269 ] criticism intensified after it was revealed that artwork by rupnik remains in use by the vatican, including in pope francis's personal residence, despite calls from cardinal seán patrick o'malley , head of the pontifical commission for the protection of minors, for its removal. the controversy fueled broader scrutiny of the vatican's response to clergy abuse cases and its commitment to transparency and justice. [ 271 ] [ 272 ] [ 273 ] in january 2025, cardinal víctor manuel fernández confirmed the ddf was working to establish an independent tribunal to move forward with judicial proceedings. [ 274 ] in 2024, francis approved a second edition of ordo exsequiarum romani pontificis , the liturgical book prescribing papal funeral rites, in order to make his funeral rites similar to that of a bishop. [ 275 ] [ 276 ] he also modified the papal burial requirements to no longer include the traditional three coffins of cypress, lead, and oak, opting to instead be buried in one zinc-lined wooden casket. [ 275 ] [ 277 ] pope francis will also be the first pope since leo xiii to be buried outside the vatican. [ 277 ] plans are made to bury him in rome's santa maria maggiore basilica. he had a " great devotion " to the salus populi romani icon kept there. [ 278 ] [ 279 ] in evangelii gaudium , francis revealed what would be the emphases of his pontificate: a missionary impulse among all catholics, sharing the faith more actively, avoiding worldliness by more visibly living the gospel of god's mercy, and helping the poor and working for social justice . [ 280 ] since 2016, criticism against francis by theological conservatives had intensified. [ 281 ] [ 282 ] [ 283 ] [ 284 ] [ 285 ] one commentator had described the conservative resistance against francis as "unique in its visibility" in recent church history. [ 286 ] some have explained the level of disagreement as due to his going beyond theoretical principles to pastoral discernment. [ 287 ] from his first major letter evangelii gaudium ( joy to the world ), francis called for "a missionary and pastoral conversion" whereby the laity would fully share in the missionary task of the church. [ 186 ] [ 288 ] then, in his letter on the call of all to the same holiness, gaudete et exsultate , francis describes holiness as "an impulse to evangelize and to leave a mark in this world". [ 289 ] francis called for decentralization of governance away from rome and for a synodal manner of decision-making in dialogue with the people. [ 290 ] he strongly opposed clericalism [ 291 ] and made women full members of the church's dicasteries in rome. [ 292 ] francis's naming was an early indication of how he shared francis of assisi's care for all of creation. this was followed in may 2015 with his major encyclical on the environment, laudato si' ( praise be to you ). [ 293 ] in october 2023, in advance to the 2023 united nations climate change conference (cop28), francis issued the apostolic exhortation laudate deum ( praise god ), in which he called for decisive action to against the climate crisis and condemned climate change denial . [ 294 ] [ 295 ] at the 2017 world food day ceremony, francis highlighted the daily impacts of climate change and the solutions provided by scientific knowledge. he pointed out that while the international community had established legal frameworks such as the paris agreement, some nations have been withdrawing. he then expressed concern over a renewed indifference to ecosystem balance, the belief in controlling limited resources, and a greed for profit. [ 296 ] in 2019, he stated that ecocide was a sin and should be made "a fifth category of crimes against peace". [ 297 ] [ 298 ] [ 299 ] in 2024, francis organized a climate summit that issued a planetary protocol for climate change resilience including three pillars: greenhouse gas emissions reduction (while prioritizing nature-based solutions ), climate change adaptation , and societal transformation. [ 300 ] francis had highly extolled "popular movements" which demonstrate the "strength of us", serve as a remedy to the "culture of the self", and are based on solidarity with the poor and the common good. [ 301 ] he had praised liberation theology founder gustavo gutierrez . [ 302 ] in 2024, while meeting with representatives of the dialop group, a discussion group between christians and marxists, pope francis stated that marxists and christians have a common mission. [ 303 ] in september 2024, francis renewed calls for a universal basic income, as well as higher taxes on billionaires. [ 304 ] cardinal walter kasper had called mercy "the key word of his pontificate". [ 49 ] : 31–32 his papal motto miserando atque eligendo ("by having mercy and by choosing") contains a central theme of his papacy, god's mercy. [ 305 ] [ 306 ] while maintaining the catholic church's traditional teaching against abortion, francis had referred to the "obsession" of some catholics with a few issues such as "abortion, gay marriage and the use of contraceptive methods" which "do not show the heart of the message of jesus christ". [ 307 ] while serving as the archbishop of buenos aires , bergoglio led public opposition to the parliamentary bill on legalizing same-sex marriage in argentina which was eventually approved by the argentine senate in 2010. [ 308 ] a letter he wrote in that campaign was criticized for using "medieval" and "obscurantist" language. [ 309 ] [ 310 ] [ 311 ] a church source quoted in the argentine newspaper la nación called the letter a strategic error that contributed to the bill's success. [ 312 ] as pope, francis had marked a more accommodative tone on some lgbtq topics than his predecessors. [ 313 ] [ 314 ] in july 2013, his televised "who am i to judge?" statement was widely reported in the international press, becoming one of his most famous statements on lgbtq people. [ 315 ] [ 316 ] [ 317 ] in other public statements, francis had emphasised the need to accept, welcome, and accompany lgbtq people, [ 307 ] [ 318 ] [ 319 ] including lgbtq children. [ 320 ] [ 321 ] francis also reiterated traditional catholic teaching that marriage is between a man and a woman [ 322 ] [ 323 ] but had supported same-sex civil unions as legal protections for same-sex couples . [ 321 ] [ 324 ] under his pontificate, the dicastery for the doctrine of the faith had confirmed that transgender people can be baptised [ 325 ] [ 326 ] and additionally allowed the blessing of same-sex couples in the document fiducia supplicans . [ 327 ] francis had privately met many lgbtq people and activists. in 2013, francis was named as person of the year by the advocate , an american lgbtq magazine . [ 328 ] he described gender theory and children's education on gender-affirming surgery as "ideological colonization". [ 329 ] [ 315 ] in september 2015, francis met with kim davis , a county clerk who was jailed for six days for contempt of court for refusing to issue marriage licences for same-sex couples, [ 330 ] [ 331 ] and in august 2018, francis was criticized for suggesting that gay children seek psychiatric treatment . [ 332 ] in a january 2023 interview with the associated press , francis denounced the criminalization of homosexuality (which he called "unjust"); he also called on the catholic church to "distinguish between a sin and crime" and asked bishops supporting such laws to reverse their position. [ 10 ] [ 316 ] [ 333 ] francis repeated this stance the following month. [ 316 ] francis had regularly been accused by conservatives of having a "soft spot" for leftist populist movements. [ 334 ] after francis's visit to cuba in 2015, catholic yale historian carlos eire said francis had a " preferential option for the oppressors" in cuba. [ 335 ] francis had expressed criticism towards right-wing populism . [ 336 ] since 2016, francis had been contrasted with u.s. president donald trump , [ 337 ] [ 11 ] with some conservative critics drawing comparisons between the two. [ 338 ] [ 339 ] during the 2016 united states presidential election , francis said of trump, "a person who only thinks about building walls, wherever they may be, and not building bridges, is not christian." trump responded, "for a religious leader to question a person's faith is disgraceful." [ 340 ] in response to criticism from venezuela's bishops , president nicolás maduro said in 2017 that he had the support of francis. [ 341 ] [ 342 ] francis met with the country's bishops in june 2017, and the venezuelan bishops' conference president stated, "there is no distance between the episcopal conference and the holy see." [ 343 ] in january 2019, 20 former presidents in latin america wrote a letter to francis criticizing his christmas address regarding the ongoing venezuelan crisis for being too simplistic and for not acknowledging what they believed to be the causes of the suffering of the victims of the crisis. [ 344 ] francis had sought peace in the crisis without picking a side. [ 345 ] francis took a more conciliatory approach toward the people's republic of china than any previous pope. [ 346 ] he continued the vatican's longstanding diplomatic recognition of the republic of china ( taiwan ), rather than the people's republic of china ; vatican city is one of just 12 countries to formally recognize taiwan . [ 347 ] [ 348 ] in 2018, however, francis approved a provisional vatican-china agreement intended to normalize the situation of china's catholics who numbered approximately 10 million as of 2024. [ 346 ] before, the chinese government claimed the authority to appoint bishops , without papal approval, through the state-controlled chinese catholic patriotic association , in contravention of longstanding church doctrine. [ 346 ] under the 2018 agreement, the vatican consults with the chinese government on the appointment of bishops and pledged not to appoint any bishop in china without beijing's approval; [ 346 ] in return, the chinese government recognized the pope as the supreme head of the catholic church. [ 349 ] the agreement was renewed for two years in 2020. [ 350 ] [ 349 ] francis's efforts toward rapprochement with china were highly controversial; a leading critic, cardinal joseph zen , said the 2018 agreement was a step toward the "annihilation" of the catholic church in china. [ 346 ] [ 351 ] [ 352 ] critics said that the 2018 agreement "sold out" chinese catholics by accepting infringements on religious freedom , undermining the vatican's spiritual authority. [ 349 ] [ 346 ] the chinese government repeatedly violated the 2018 deal with the vatican. [ 349 ] [ 353 ] francis had defended the vatican's dialogue with china on the appointment of new bishops, saying in 2021 that uneasy dialogue was better than no dialogue at all. [ 354 ] from the signing of the agreement until 2022, only six catholic bishops in china were appointed. [ 349 ] in november 2022, the vatican publicly accused china of violating the agreement by installing john peng weizhao as an auxiliary bishop without vatican approval. [ 349 ] in april 2023, the chinese government also installed joseph shen bin as bishop of shanghai without vatican approval. three months later, francis recognized shen bin's appointment; the vatican secretary of state, pietro parolin , said that the pope wanted to "remedy the canonical irregularity created in shanghai, in view of the greater good of the diocese and the fruitful exercise of the bishop's pastoral ministry." [ 350 ] the vatican and the chinese government renewed the agreement in 2022 and again in 2024. [ 355 ] [ 356 ] in november 2020, francis named china's uyghur minority among a list of the world's persecuted peoples. he wrote: "i think often of persecuted peoples: the rohingya [muslims in myanmar], the poor uighurs, the yazidi —what isis did to them was truly cruel—or christians in egypt and pakistan killed by bombs that went off while they prayed in church." zhao lijian , the spokesman of the foreign ministry of china, said francis's remarks had "no factual basis". [ 357 ] in 2019, during the hong kong pro-democracy protests , francis was criticized by zen and other catholic clergy in hong kong for failing to taking a stand against china's repression and instead being quoted as saying, "i would like to go to china. i love china." francis compared the protests in hong kong to those seen in chile and in france. [ 358 ] on a theological level, controversy arose after the publication of the apostolic exhortation amoris laetitia , especially regarding whether the exhortation had changed the catholic church's sacramental discipline concerning access to the sacraments of penance and the eucharist for divorced couples who have civilly remarried . [ 359 ] francis had written: "it is important that the divorced who have entered a new union should be made to feel part of the church." he called for "a responsible personal and pastoral discernment of particular cases". he went on to say: "it is true that general rules set forth a good which can never be disregarded or neglected, but in their formulation they cannot provide absolutely for all particular situations." [ 360 ] the exhortation had been implemented in different ways by bishops around the world. [ 361 ] in july 2017, a group of conservative clergy, academics, and laymen signed a document labelled as a " filial correction " of francis, [ 362 ] which criticized the pope for promoting what it described as seven heretical propositions through various words, actions, and omissions during his pontificate. [ 363 ] the document on human fraternity for world peace and living together is a joint statement signed by francis and ahmed el-tayeb , grand imam of al-azhar , on 4 february 2019. this statement is concerned with how different faiths can live peaceably in the same areas; it later inspired the international day of human fraternity , as acknowledged by the un secretary-general antónio guterres . [ 364 ] [ 365 ] criticisms focused particularly on the passage about god's will with regard to the diversity of religions, claiming that the "pluralism and the diversity of religions, colour, sex, race and language are willed by god in his wisdom, through which he created human beings". [ 366 ] [ 367 ] catholic theologian chad pecknold wrote that this sentence was "puzzling, and potentially problematic". [ 368 ] some catholic observers tried to understand it as an allusion to the "permissive will" of god, allowing evil on earth. [ 367 ] pecknold wrote that the diversity of religions might also be "evidence of our natural desire to know god". [ 368 ] bishop athanasius schneider claims that pope francis clarified to him that he was referring to "the permissive will of god". [ 369 ] in july 2021, francis issued motu proprio , the apostolic letter titled traditionis custodes , which reversed the decision of his predecessor benedict xvi in summorum pontificum and imposed new restrictions on the use of the traditional latin mass . the letter returned to the bishops the power to grant or ban the latin mass in their dioceses, and required newly ordained priests to request permission before performing the old rite, among other changes. [ 370 ] [ 371 ] traditionis custodes had been criticized by prelates including cardinals raymond leo burke , gerhard ludwig müller , and joseph zen , and many lay faithful. edwin pentin wrote in national catholic register that "the most general criticism is that the restrictions are unnecessary, needlessly harsh, and implemented in an unjustifiably swift fashion." [ 372 ] in december 2023, the dicastery for the doctrine of the faith issued a declaration, fiducia supplicans , approved by francis. [ 327 ] fiducia supplicans intended to provide clarification and reforms on the catholic church's treatment of "irregular relationships", defined as those who establish a monogamous and emotional bond that lasts over time and have not contracted a catholic marriage. notably, it allows catholic priests to perform "spontaneous blessings" of same-sex couples, as well as opposite-sex couples who are not married, and civilly married couples at least one party of which was previously divorced but had not received an annulment . [ 373 ] fiducia supplicans sparked considerable controversy among catholics, including from several conservative commentators, clerical congregations, and high-profile cardinals, bishops, priests, and lay people. [ 374 ] [ 375 ] [ 376 ] cardinal gerhard ludwig müller called it "sacrilegious and blasphemous" and "self-contradictory". [ 377 ] cardinal robert sarah described the blessing of couples in irregular situations as "a heresy that seriously undermines the church". [ 378 ] on 11 january 2024, cardinal fridolin ambongo besungu announced that all episcopal conferences in africa, represented in secam , would reject blessings for same-sex couples, stating that "the extra-liturgical blessings proposed in the declaration...cannot be carried out in africa without exposing themselves to scandals". [ 379 ] [ 380 ] when francis was archbishop of buenos aires, he authored a text entitled "dialogues between john paul ii and fidel castro". [ 381 ] john paul was the first pope to visit cuba. after a meeting between francis and cuban leader raúl castro in may 2015, castro said that he was considering returning to the catholic church. [ 382 ] he said in a televised news conference, "i read all the speeches of the pope, his commentaries, and if the pope continues this way, i will go back to praying and go back to the [catholic] church." [ 383 ] as pope, francis played a key role in the talks toward restoring full diplomatic relations between the u.s. and cuba , announced on 17 december 2014. [ 384 ] the pope, along with the government of canada , was a behind-the-scenes broker of the agreement, taking the role following president obama's request during his visit to the pope in march 2014. [ 385 ] the success of the negotiations was credited to francis because "as a religious leader with the confidence of both sides, he was able to convince the obama and castro administrations that the other side would live up to the deal". [ 384 ] en route to the united states for a visit in september 2015 , the pope stopped in cuba. [ 381 ] in may 2014, francis visited israel and the palestinian territories . [ 386 ] [ 387 ] francis offered symbolic gestures to both sides in the israeli–palestinian conflict . [ 387 ] in addition to visiting the western wall , yad vashem , and the church of the holy sepulchre , he became the first pope to visit the grave of theodor herzl , entered the west bank from jordan rather than israel, and invited palestinian authority president mahmoud abbas and israeli president shimon peres to a prayer summit at the vatican—both accepted. [ 387 ] he also visited bethlehem , where he gave a speech alongside abbas, and celebrated mass at the church of the nativity . [ 387 ] at the invitation of israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu , he visited the victims of acts of terror memorial ; at the invitation of palestinian authorities, he prayed at a portion of the israeli west bank barrier . [ 387 ] in addition to meetings with peres and netanyahu, francis met grand mufti of jerusalem muhammad ahmad hussein , chief rabbis yitzhak yosef and david lau , and rabbi of the western wall and the holy places shmuel rabinowitz . [ 387 ] in may 2015, francis welcomed abbas to the vatican and said that: "the angel of peace destroys the evil spirit of war. i thought about you: may you be an angel of peace." [ 388 ] the vatican signed a treaty recognizing the state of palestine . [ 389 ] the vatican issued statements concerning the hope that the peace talks could resume between israel and palestine. abbas's visit was on the occasion of the canonization of two palestinian nuns. [ 390 ] on 13 may 2015, vatican city announced the intention to sign its first treaty with the state of palestine after formally recognizing it as a state in february 2013. [ 391 ] in may 2021, amid clashes in jerusalem , francis reiterated calls for peace between israel and palestinians during his regina caeli address. [ 392 ] [ 393 ] francis condemned the hamas-led attack on israel on 7 october 2023 and also criticized israel's actions in the gaza strip during the subsequent gaza war , saying that "terror should not justify terror" and describing israel's airstrikes as "cruelty, this is not war." [ 394 ] [ 395 ] he condemned the killing of two palestinian christian women by an idf sniper in gaza, calling it "terrorism". [ 396 ] throughout the war, francis had called for an immediate ceasefire, the release of all hostages , [ 397 ] and the implementation of a two-state solution . [ 398 ] he also communicated with the sole parish of gaza daily from the start of the war until his death. [ 399 ] in november 2024, pope francis suggested that the international community should investigate if israel's campaign in gaza is a genocide of the palestinian people. [ 400 ] since october 2023 until the day he died he spoke with the only catholic church in the gaza strip every night. [ 401 ] [ 402 ] in his last public appearance he again called for a ceasefire and condemned the "deplorable humanitarian situation" in gaza. [ 403 ] [ 404 ] francis made the plight of refugees and migrants "a core component of his pastoral work" and had defended their rights in dialogue both with europe and with the united states . in 2019, he placed a statue in st. peter's square to bring attention to the christian imperative involved in their situation (hebrews 13:2). [ 405 ] [ 406 ] [ 407 ] in line with this policy, francis had criticized neo-nationalists and populists who reject the acceptance of refugees. [ 408 ] [ 409 ] in april 2016, francis, along with ecumenical patriarch bartholomew and archbishop ieronimos ii of athens , visited the moria refugee camp on the greek island of lesbos in order to call the attention of the world to the 2015 european migrant crisis . there, the three christian leaders signed a joint declaration. [ 410 ] in february 2025, following the election to a second term of us president donald trump there were mass deportations and swingeing cuts to international aid by the new administration, defended by vice-president jd vance , a catholic, by recasting the catholic idea of ordo amoris (the right ordering of one's love) as a justification for nativism. francis wrote what had been described as "an extraordinary and excoriating response to us bishops". he cited the parable of the good samaritan , described the ordo amoris as the love that "builds a fraternity open to all, without exception" and criticised the focus on solely family, community or national identity as "[introducing] an ideological criterion that distorts social life and imposes the will of the strongest". [ 411 ] [ 412 ] in january 2017, francis demanded the resignation of matthew festing , the 79th prince and grand master of the sovereign military order of malta . [ 413 ] the pope's demand was a response to festing and cardinal raymond leo burke dismissing baron albrecht von boeselager from his position in the order of malta. fra' giacomo dalla torre del tempio di sanguinetto was appointed leader in may 2017. [ 414 ] following the february 2022 russian invasion of ukraine , a major escalation of the russo-ukrainian war , francis visited the russian embassy in rome, an unprecedented action. [ 415 ] he called ukrainian president volodymyr zelenskyy to express "sorrow" as the vatican worked to find "room for negotiation" to end the war. [ 416 ] the day after the invasion began in february 2022, francis assured sviatoslav shevchuk , the major archbishop of the ukrainian greek catholic church , that "he would do everything he can to help end the ukraine conflict". [ 417 ] during 27 february 2022 angelus address, francis called for peace, saying, "silence the weapons!" [ 418 ] at a september 2022 interfaith event in kazakhstan, francis urged patriarch kirill not to become an "altar boy" of putin. [ 419 ] throughout the war, francis had called for an end to armed conflict. [ 420 ] initially, he avoided specific criticism of russia and president putin , frustrating many ukrainians. [ 421 ] later, he described ukraine as "martyred" and prayed for the victims of russian aggression but still did not directly criticize putin or the russian government. [ 421 ] [ 422 ] his statements aligned more with countries like brazil, india, and china [ 422 ] rather than the u.s. and europe—a stance some attribute to his distrust of america. [ 423 ] francis warned against what he called a simplistic good versus evil perception of the conflict, saying that a world leader who he did not name told him that nato was "barking at the gates" of russia, which led him to believe that the conflict was "somehow either provoked or not prevented." [ 419 ] these remarks damaged the vatican's standing as a mediator in the conflict because supporters of ukraine saw them as echoing russian narratives about the war. [ 424 ] francis's blanket denunciations of arms transfers and the weapons industry [ 421 ] [ 425 ] seemed to condemn western military aid to ukraine . [ 422 ] in a september 2022 press conference, seven months into the war, francis said that it was "licit" and justified for ukraine to defend itself but called for a negotiated settlement (saying that there must be "dialogue with any power that is at war, even if it is with the aggressor" and even when "it stinks"). [ 426 ] [ 427 ] [ 428 ] he also suggested that arms transfers to ukraine were "a political decision which it can be moral, morally acceptable, if it is done under conditions of morality." [ 426 ] he later said that ukrainians were a "noble" people and recounted cardinal konrad krajewski 's reports of the "savage acts, the monstrosity, the tortured bodies" inflicted upon ukraine. [ 428 ] francis's stances were rooted in part in his hope that the vatican could broker a peace deal between ukraine and russia, a possibility that analysts viewed as extremely unlikely. [ 421 ] he dispatched two high-ranking vatican officials—cardinals krajewski and michael czerny —as envoys on several trips to ukraine in 2022. [ 429 ] [ 430 ] [ 431 ] which was considered a highly unusual move of vatican diplomacy. [ 432 ] in march 2022, francis consecrated both russia and ukraine to the immaculate heart of mary . [ 433 ] francis said in april 2023, during a trip to budapest , that he was working on a secret "mission" to bring peace and return ukrainian children abducted by russia . [ 434 ] [ 435 ] however, francis's efforts to position the vatican as a mediator have continuously failed. [ 422 ] [ 424 ] in early october 2022, francis for the first time directly appealed to putin to halt the "spiral of violence and death" in ukraine. [ 436 ] in the same speech, francis asked ukrainian president zelenskyy to be open about "serious peace proposals" while recognizing that ukraine had suffered an "aggression" and saying that he was "pained about the suffering of the ukrainian people". [ 437 ] francis condemned the persecution of christians by isil and supported the use of force to stop islamic militants from attacking religious minorities in iraq. [ 438 ] in january 2018, francis met yazidi refugees in europe, expressed his support for their right to religious freedom, and called upon the international community "not to remain a silent and unresponsive spectator" to the yazidi genocide . [ 439 ] in february 2019, francis visited abu dhabi , united arab emirates, on the invitation of mohammed bin zayed al nahyan . francis became the first pope to celebrate mass on the arabian peninsula , attended by more than 120,000 attendees at the zayed sports city stadium . [ 440 ] in march 2021, francis held a historic meeting with iraq's top shi'ite cleric, grand ayatollah ali al-sistani , and visited ur , a site traditionally identified as the birthplace of the prophet abraham . he and the iraqi cleric urged the muslim and christian communities to work together for peaceful coexistence. [ 441 ] [ 442 ] in september 2024, francis visited indonesia , the country with the largest muslim population, [ 443 ] where he attended inter-religious dialogue in istiqlal mosque in jakarta and was welcomed by the grand imam nasaruddin umar . [ 444 ] francis and the grand imam additionally signed the joint declaration of istiqlal 2024, underscoring that the values common to all religious traditions be effectively promoted to "defeat the culture of violence and indifference" and promote reconciliation and peace. [ 444 ] the declaration also read and attended by representatives from other religions, including protestants , hindus , buddhists , confucians , and folk religions . [ 445 ] pope francis was the first pontiff to participate in the g7 , a meeting of leaders of the largest economies in the world. during his speech at the g7 forum in italy , he stressed that humanity is in great danger due to the wars that are taking place such as the war in ukraine and in gaza . he also stated that the excessive use of artificial intelligence is posing a risk to jobs, and remarked on reproductive practices without specifically mentioning abortion . [ 446 ] [ 447 ] [ 448 ] [ 449 ] in september 2015, francis visited the united nations headquarters in new york city where he addressed the un general assembly ; following his speech, he visited the national september 11 memorial and museum . [ 450 ] in june 2023, francis issued an address to the un security council while recovering from abdominal surgery; the statement was read by vatican official paul gallagher on the pope's behalf. [ 451 ] [ 452 ] after the 2017 catalan independence referendum that originated the 2017–18 spanish constitutional crisis on 1 october 2017, francis communicated to the spanish ambassador to the holy see gerardo bugallo that the vatican would not recognise secessionist or self-determination movements that were not the result of decolonisation. [ 453 ] francis was frequently described as a progressive or liberal moderate. [ 454 ] commentator william saletan described francis as liberal and fundamentally anti-conservative in his analysis of francis's first long interview after becoming pope, highlighting francis's statements "god is to be encountered in the world of today" and "god manifests himself in historical revelation, in history". [ 455 ] other have contested descriptions of francis as liberal. [ 456 ] in 2014, the vatican criticized some italian news agencies, as well as the agence france-presse , for reporting that a comment francis made was suggestive of an opening toward acceptance of same-sex marriage or civil unions; a vatican spokesperson said the pope's remark was taken out of context. [ 457 ] important aspects of francis's public image include "his recognizable humanity" and gestures of humility, as well as his efforts to preserve his autonomy amid roman curia bureaucracy. [ 458 ] he was a frequent user of landline telephones ; he reportedly had never owned a computer or mobile phone . [ 458 ] in december 2013, both time and the advocate magazines named francis as their "person of the year"; esquire magazine named him as the "best-dressed man" for 2013, citing his simpler vestments. [ 459 ] rolling stone magazine followed in january 2014 by making him their featured front cover. [ 460 ] [ 461 ] fortune magazine also ranked francis as number one in their list of 50 greatest leaders. [ 462 ] he was included in forbes lists of most powerful people in the world in 2014 [ 463 ] and 2016. [ 464 ] in march 2013, a new song was dedicated to francis and released in brazilian portuguese, european portuguese, and italian, titled come puoi ("how you can"). [ 129 ] a street in la plata , argentina, was renamed papa francisco in his honour. [ 465 ] the argentine chamber of deputies passed legislation to mint a commemorative coin as a tribute to francis in 2013. [ 466 ] [ 467 ] as of 2013, sales of papal souvenirs, a sign of popularity, were up. [ 468 ] francis presided over his first joint public wedding ceremony in a nuptial mass for 20 couples from the archdiocese of rome on 14 september 2014, a few weeks before the start of 5–19 october third extraordinary general assembly of the synod of bishops (the synod on the family). [ 469 ] [ e ] in 2016, francis became the first pope to create an instagram account. [ 471 ] he broke records after having gained over one million followers in under 12 hours of the account being up. [ 472 ] on 26 november 2020, francis became the first pope to write an op-ed for the new york times , addressing issues such as covid-19 restrictions on public gatherings and the need for global solidarity. [ 473 ] [ 474 ] francis was a longtime supporter of the football club san lorenzo de almagro . when the argentine club won the 2014 copa libertadores , he received the team at his guest house near st. peter's square, where he was gifted a replica trophy and a glove of goalkeeper sebastian torrico. [ 475 ] elected at 76 years old, francis was reported to be healthy; his doctors had said the lung tissue removed in his youth did not significantly affect his health. [ 476 ] the only concern would be decreased respiratory reserve if he had a respiratory infection. [ 477 ] the pope had suffered from chronic lung damage, due in part to the lung excision he had as a young man. in the 2020s, he was prone to bouts of influenza and bronchitis in the winter. knee problems and sciatica prompted him to frequently use a wheelchair, walker, or cane. [ 478 ] in 2021, the pope's health problems prompted rumors that he might resign, [ 479 ] which francis dismissed. [ 480 ] in june 2022, after undergoing treatment to his knee, francis canceled planned trips to the democratic republic of the congo and south sudan . [ 481 ] in march 2023, francis was hospitalized in rome with a respiratory infection. [ 482 ] he returned to celebrate the easter vigil mass on holy saturday , in april. [ 483 ] in june, francis underwent abdominal surgery after suffering from a hernia . [ 484 ] he acknowledged that his recurring mobility problems had precipitated the beginning of what reuters termed "a new, slower phase of his papacy", [ 485 ] although he was praised by disabled catholics for making his "disability part of his visible identity". [ 486 ] in february 2025, francis entered gemelli hospital in rome due to bronchitis . [ 487 ] he remained for more than a month after developing a polymicrobial infection of his respiratory tract and bilateral pneumonia. [ 488 ] [ 489 ] [ 490 ] vatican news described his condition as critical and reported that he was given blood transfusions and high-flow oxygen . [ 491 ] [ 492 ] eventually, francis was put on mechanical ventilation for a number of days, and suffered two episodes of " acute respiratory insufficiency ". [ 493 ] after the infection improved, he was discharged from hospital 23 march, [ 494 ] immediately after blessing a crowd from his balcony; he was expected to spend at least two months recuperating at his home in domus sanctae marthae in vatican city , [ 495 ] maintaining a reduced work schedule. [ 496 ] [ 497 ] he appeared in public for the first time since his hospitalization on 6 april. [ 490 ] francis's last public appearance was at st. peter's square in vatican city on easter sunday , 20 april 2025, where he gave his final easter address where he called for a ceasefire in gaza . [ 15 ] [ 498 ] [ 403 ] he died at 07:35 local time (utc+02:00) on easter monday , 21 april 2025, aged 88, in his residence in domus sanctae marthae . [ 499 ] [ 500 ] the death was caused by a celebral stroke , which led to coma and irreversible cardiac arrest . [ 501 ] [ 502 ] his death was announced by cardinal kevin farrell on the vatican's tv channel and in a video statement. [ 503 ] the pope's death begins a papal interregnum and a nine-day period of mourning known as the novemdiales ( latin for 'nine days'). his funeral will take place on 26 april 2025. [ 504 ] cardinal-electors will arrive in rome to attend the congregation of cardinals , which will decide the date and time of the conclave set to elect francis's successor . [ 505 ] francis's spiritual testament, dated 29 june 2022, repeated his wish to be buried at the basilica of santa maria maggiore in rome. [ 506 ] [ 507 ] [ 508 ] [ 509 ] his final remarks read as follows: may the lord grant a fitting reward to all those who have loved me and who continue to pray for me. the suffering that has marked the final part of my life, i offer to the lord, for peace in the world and for fraternity among peoples. [ 509 ] francis reigned over a period of widespread change and reckoning within the global catholic order and within society at large. throughout his papacy, he was noted for his support for the plight of refugees , migrants , and the impoverished . [ 510 ] since their beginnings, he had been outspoken in his criticism of the wars in ukraine , sudan , gaza , dr congo , and myanmar , notwithstanding numerous other conflicts and acts of suppression against the civilian population globally. [ 511 ] [ 512 ] he kept with clerical precedent in opposing the death penalty in all cases. [ 513 ] [ 514 ] he appointed more than 80% of the cardinals that will elect his successor, notably reducing the european share of the college of cardinals from a majority to a plurality. [ 515 ] [ 514 ] he was celebrated for his outreach to china and the african continent , his tolerance towards differing faith communities, and his attention to younger catholic adherents and the changing nature of the faith. [ 516 ] [ 511 ] though women were not allowed into the college or diocese under his papacy, he made significant strides towards increasing their presence in the central administration of the church, and was the first to allow them to vote at a bishops meeting. [ 514 ] [ 249 ] he was both hailed and scorned for his opposition to the traditional latin mass . [ citation needed ] in other areas, he urged a return to traditional patterns of worship and community engagement. his reign was marked by lingering controversies surrounding sexual abuse scandals within the church, an issue he sought to address during his tenure, but which nonetheless found the vatican mired in controversy, damaged in credibility, and drained in financing. [ 514 ] in 2022, he issued the first apology by the vatican for its role in the cultural erasure and forced assimilation of first nations peoples in canada from the late 19th to mid-20th centuries. [ 517 ] his acceptance of the conditional blessing of same-sex couples earned him praise from many progressive outlets within and outside of the church. some groups, though, have been critical of the extent of his tolerance on various issues, particularly his acceptance of transgender identity and the larger question of homosexuality , queer identity , and sin . [ 518 ] [ 519 ] actions such as this also drew significant criticism from conservative elements within the college. it culminated in the 2022 authorship of an anonymous memo by a prominent conservative cardinal which was deeply critical of francis's administration, describing it as a "catastrophe". [ 514 ] the sheer rate of change over the course of the pontiff's tenure, which witnessed the legalization of same-sex marriage in the united states and much of the world, the rise of social media , overwhelming growth in the share of the catholic population outside of europe and the west , the reinvigoration of populist and far-right extremist movements globally, the american exit from afghanistan and withdrawal of international forces from mali , the covid-19 pandemic , the rise of china in the global economy , the fall of the syrian dictatorship , and the largest conflict in europe and highest number of countries engaged in conflict since the second world war , leads to his tenure and death serving as a critical point of transition in the history of the catholic church. [ 520 ] the official form of address of the pope in english was his holiness pope francis . holy father was among the other honorifics used for popes. [ 521 ] by 2015, there were two biographical films about francis: call me francesco (italy, 2015), starring rodrigo de la serna , and francis: pray for me (argentina, 2015), starring darío grandinetti . [ 546 ] a music album, wake up! , consisting of speeches by francis accompanied by music was released on 27 november 2015. [ 547 ] [ 548 ] [ 549 ] several documentaries have been created about francis. pope francis: a man of his word (2018) is a documentary film co-written and directed by wim wenders . [ 550 ] [ 551 ] on 21 october 2020, the documentary francesco directed by film producer evgeny afineevsky premiered. [ 552 ] [ 553 ] on 4 october 2022, the documentary the letter: a message for our earth premiered on youtube originals, directed by nicolas brown and produced by off the fence in partnership with laudato si' movement . [ 554 ] francis was played by jonathan pryce in the biographical film the two popes (2019). [ 555 ]

daniel roy gilchrist noboa azín ( / n oʊ ˈ b oʊ ə / noh- boh -ə ; [daˈnjel noˈβo.a] ; born 30 november 1987) is an ecuadorian politician and businessman serving as the 48th and current president of ecuador since 2023. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] having first taken office at the age of 35, he is the second-youngest president in the country's history, after juan josé flores , [ 5 ] and the youngest to be elected. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] noboa was a member of the national assembly of ecuador from 2021 until 2023 when the national assembly was dissolved following the muerte cruzada constitutional mechanism invoked by president guillermo lasso . before his political career, noboa served in several positions at noboa corporation, an exporting business founded by his father álvaro noboa , a billionaire who unsuccessfully ran for president of ecuador five times. he has been widely described as an heir to his father's company and fortune. [ 11 ] in may 2023, noboa announced his candidacy for president in the 2023 snap election , running on the national democratic action ticket. he advanced to the run-off election in october, facing luisa gonzález , which many interpreted as an upset given his low polling numbers in the days leading up to the election. [ 12 ] noboa went on to win nearly 52% of the vote in the run-off, defeating gonzález on 15 october 2023. [ 13 ] he was re-elected to a full four-year term in the runoff of the 2025 presidential election , defeating gonzález again with an improved margin. [ 14 ] daniel roy gilchrist noboa azín was born in miami, florida , united states on 30 november 1987, [ 15 ] [ 16 ] and was raised in guayaquil . [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] he is the son of ecuadorian businessman álvaro noboa and ecuadorian physician annabella azín . [ 20 ] noboa graduated from the new york university stern school of business in 2010, [ 21 ] and later earned a master of business administration from the kellogg school of management at northwestern university in evanston, illinois . [ 22 ] he studied at harvard university in 2020. [ 22 ] [ 23 ] in 2022, he obtained a master's degree in political communication and strategic governance from george washington university under the supervision of professor roberto izurieta , noboa's current press secretary. [ 22 ] at the age of 18, noboa founded his own company, dna entertainment group, with the purpose of organizing events. [ 20 ] his father, álvaro noboa, owns noboa corporation, a banana exporter. [ 11 ] daniel noboa is seen as an heir to the company. [ 11 ] he has served as shipping director of noboa corporation. [ 20 ] he was also commercial and logistics director between 2010 [ 24 ] and june 2018. [ 20 ] the brazilian daily folha de s.paulo revealed in october 2023 that noboa is the owner of two offshore companies located in panama, according to the panama papers . [ 25 ] he is also linked to several other companies owned by his father in tax havens . [ 25 ] noboa was elected to the national assembly in the 2021 legislative elections , representing santa elena , for the united ecuadorian political movement. [ 26 ] he was inaugurated on 14 may in the same year. in that same may, he was appointed chair of the economic development commission. [ 27 ] [ 28 ] his political ideology in the national assembly been described as both centrist and centre-right. [ 29 ] [ 30 ] noboa was absent during president lasso's impeachment trial, however a proxy voted in the affirmative. [ 31 ] in march 2023, he was in favor of the muerte cruzada , in the face of the rejection and filing of the investment law, presented by the government of guillermo lasso . [ 32 ] on 17 may 2023, lasso invoked muerte cruzada , dissolving the national assembly and ending noboa's tenure as an assemblyman. [ 33 ] in may 2023, and with the dissolution of parliament amid the political crisis , he presented himself as a pre-candidate for the presidential elections of the same year , by the political movement national democratic action (adn), [ 21 ] and also supported by the movements people, equality and democracy (pid) [ 3 ] and mover . [ 34 ] his running mate was businesswoman verónica abad rojas . [ 35 ] his campaign has focused on job creation, tax incentives for newly established businesses and increased criminal sentences for tax evaders. [ 36 ] he has also pledged to improve the justice system in the country amid growing violence. [ 36 ] his campaign is seen as traditional, drawing on the grupo noboa social welfare foundation founded by his parents, as well as his ties as chairman of the commission on economic development. [ 37 ] in two july polls, he was polling at 6.4% and at 3.1%. [ 38 ] [ 39 ] in early august, noboa was polling at 2.5% and 3.7%. [ 40 ] in a poll conducted a week before the election, he was polling at 3.3%. [ 41 ] on 20 august, noboa gathered 23.47% of the actual votes and advanced to the run-off election set for 15 october, facing luisa gonzález . [ 36 ] his second-place finish was seen as surprising, with some attributing his rise in popularity to his debate performance. [ 36 ] [ 42 ] noboa credited the young voter base for his victory. [ 43 ] [ 44 ] in the second round, noboa was elected, winning 52% of the vote. [ 13 ] elected at age 35, he is the youngest president in ecuadorian history, beating the record of jaime roldós aguilera who was inaugurated at 38 years old in 1979. [ 45 ] following his victory, noboa thanked voters for believing in "a new political project, a young political project, an improbable political project". [ 13 ] he vowed "to return peace to the country, to give education to the youth again, to be able to provide employment to the many people who are looking for it". [ 13 ] prior to taking office, noboa travelled to the united states and europe to search for investors and business lenders to assist the country's debt crisis. [ 46 ] during his visit to washington, d.c. he met with officials from the world bank , the international monetary fund , and the organization of american states . [ 47 ] on 17 october, noboa visited the presidential palace to meet with outgoing president guillermo lasso . [ 48 ] noboa was inaugurated as president on 23 november 2023, becoming the country's youngest person to assume the office after winning a popular election. [ 49 ] colombia's president, gustavo petro , was the only foreign head of state to attend his inauguration. [ 50 ] his inaugural address lasted seven minutes, featuring his criticism of the "old paradigms" in the national assembly. [ 50 ] because noboa was elected in a snap election, upon his inauguration he only had 18 months to govern and complete the rest of lasso's term before the next scheduled elections in 2025. [ 48 ] hours after taking office, noboa pledged reforms to reduce violence and create employment opportunities in the country, even though he had not appointed a finance minister . [ 46 ] he initially announced he would appoint economist sariha moya to the position, but ultimately had her lead the nation's planning secretariat instead. [ 51 ] many of his cabinet appointees were sworn in on 23 november 2023, including labor minister ivonne núñez and zaida rovira , who became minister of economic and social inclusion. [ 52 ] [ 53 ] two days into his term, noboa ordered the ministry of the interior to repeal the drug consumption table, which he said encouraged "micro-trafficking". [ 54 ] he simultaneously instructed the interior and health ministries to create programs to reduce the consumption of narcotics and provide treatment for drug abusers. [ 55 ] in conflict with vice president verónica abad rojas from the very first days of his mandate, he distanced her by appointing her "peace collaborator" between israel and the palestinians , a mission she was to carry out from the ecuadorian embassy in tel aviv . at the same time, he announced the reorganisation of the vice presidency in order to reduce its powers. abad rojas accused him of sending her "to die in the war ". [ 56 ] [ 57 ] indeed, noboa sent abad rojas to israel just weeks after diplomats were being evacuated from israel due to the october 7 hamas-led attack on israel , and with decreased security while she remained outside of ecuador. [ 58 ] in an effort to reduce overcrowding, on 15 december noboa proposed deporting 1,500 foreign prisoners who are incarcerated in ecuador. [ 59 ] he also said he would consider constructing two maximum security prisons , drawing inspiration from el salvador . [ 60 ] the same day, noboa announced he would seek to cut $1 billion in government spending while raising revenue via gold reserves worth around $300 million. [ 61 ] noboa addressed the un security council on 9 december, highlighting criminal gang activities and overall security as high priorities. [ 62 ] on 10 december 2023, noboa attended the inauguration of argentinian president javier milei . [ 63 ] noboa also met with ukrainian president volodymyr zelenskyy , who praised him for his stance on russia's invasion. [ 64 ] the two discussed expanding bilateral relations, primarily surrounding security and trade. zelenskyy also invited noboa to visit ukraine. [ 65 ] upon their inauguration in november 2023, both noboa and abad rojas distanced themselves from each other, with abad rojas launching personal attacks against noboa. she did not appear in the inaugural photo of the cabinet and subsequently was appointed ambassador to israel . shortly thereafter, she was ordered to move to istanbul within three days. abad rojas called these decisions a "forced exile". [ 66 ] in june 2024, abad rojas survived an impeachment attempt by the noboa government due to legal issues. in november 2024, she was suspended from the vice presidency by the labor ministry for 150 days. [ 67 ] noboa named secretary of national planning sariha moya as acting vice president. [ 68 ] abad rojas' suspension was lifted by a judge in december 2024, along with an order for the labor ministry to give her an apology for the suspension. [ 69 ] on 30 march 2025, noboa caused controversy for ignoring the constitutional court and appointing cynthia gellibert by decree as vice president, suspending abad rojas once again. she was disenfranchised for two years by the country's electoral tribunal in a 3–2 decision on a gender-based political violence counterclaim filed by foreign minister gabriela sommerfeld , following abad rojas' initial lawsuit against noboa and others for alleged harassment. [ 70 ] [ 71 ] analysts said noboa was focused on institutional stability and a leadership aligned with his vision of government, which reinforced his political strategy in the wake of this election. [ 72 ] on 7 january 2024, los choneros leader josé adolfo macías villamar escaped from prison in the city of guayaquil , on the day of his scheduled transfer to a maximum-security prison. the events were reported the next day by authorities, with charges being filed against two prison guards. [ 73 ] [ 74 ] following the escape, noboa declared a state of emergency, to last for 60 days, [ 75 ] giving authorities the power to suspend people's rights and allowing the military to be mobilized inside prisons. riots ensued in multiple prisons across ecuador. [ 76 ] two days later, mass armed attacks occurred throughout the country, including the storming of a television station during a live broadcast. [ 77 ] [ 78 ] the left-wing opposition supported the government, saying: "now is the time for national unity. organized crime has declared war on the state, and the state must prevail". some analysts criticized noboa for providing an exclusively security-based response to crime, without making any announcements on possible reforms of the police and judiciary, reputed to be highly corrupt, or on social policies to combat the root causes of violence. [ 79 ] amid the conflict, a series of human rights violations were denounced. the lack of regulation and the way in which security measures were implemented resulted in allegations of human rights violations from local and international civil society organizations such as the alianza por los derechos humanos de ecuador and human rights watch . [ 80 ] [ 81 ] in mid-2024, the united nations committee against torture noted its concern over allegations about the management of the crisis and the treatment of detainees by ecuadorian security forces. [ 82 ] in 2025, the nation's permanent committee for the defense of human rights issued a report on the potential cases of 27 people victims of forced disappearance by state forces. [ 83 ] the progen case in ecuador has also sparked a scandal due to a $149 million contract signed by the government for the purchase of thermal generators. [ 84 ] amid an energy crisis, delays and the lack of transparency in the process have worsened the situation, leaving the country without the promised 150 megawatts. [ 85 ] on 5 april 2024, the mexican embassy in quito was raided by ecuadorian police and military forces. mexico and numerous other countries decried the raid as a violation of the 1961 vienna convention on diplomatic relations and the 1954 caracas convention on diplomatic asylum . [ 86 ] the raid was carried out to arrest the former vice president of ecuador, jorge glas , who had been sentenced for corruption and had been living in the embassy since 17 december 2023. [ 87 ] a few hours before the attack, he had been granted political asylum . [ 86 ] in response to the raid, noboa said he made "exceptional decisions to protect national security, the rule of law and the dignity of a population that rejects any type of impunity for criminals, corrupt people or narco-terrorists", and that he would "not allow sentenced criminals involved in very serious crimes to be given asylum", arguing that such actions were against the vienna convention and other international agreements. [ 88 ] noboa later said that he wished to resolve the diplomatic issue with mexico, but added that "justice is not negotiated" and that "we will never protect criminals who have harmed mexicans". [ 89 ] in may 2024, noboa registered to run for re-election in the upcoming 2025 general election . [ 90 ] in august 2024, noboa named maría josé pinto gonzález artigas as his running mate. [ 91 ] in february 2025, noboa advanced to the run-off, facing luisa gonzález in a rematch from the previous election. [ 92 ] in the first round, noboa received 44.17% of the vote, with gonzález narrowly behind at 43.97%. [ 93 ] in april 2025, noboa was re-elected in a runoff with 55% of the vote, defeating gonzález in a landslide. [ 94 ] the result was a decisive win for noboa, who expectations based on pre-election polling, with his campaign being notable for its focus on young people. [ 14 ] noboa said in march 2025 that he wanted american, european and brazilian armies to join his war against criminal gangs. he added he would like president donald trump to designate ecuadorean gangs as terrorist groups, as he has done for some mexican and venezuelan cartels. [ 95 ] he thereafter started laying the groundwork for u.s. forces to arrive. [ 96 ] he met trump on 30 march 2025, with trump agreeing to help. [ 97 ] noboa has been regarded as an economically liberal , pro-business social liberal , but rejected identification with both the left and right of the political spectrum , broadly describing his political alignment as centre-left . [ 47 ] [ 98 ] [ 48 ] according to constantin groll, head of the friedrich-ebert-stiftung 's office in ecuador, noboa can be classified as right-wing for holding pro-business and conservative positions. [ 99 ] the guardian also described him as right-wing, [ 100 ] while bbc described him as centre-right . [ 14 ] in an interview with diario expreso , when questioned about some criticism for his lack of defined political views, noboa referenced his father alvaro noboa, mentioning that he ran for left wing, socialist and indigenous parties against the right. "what is my ideology? centre, centre-left." said daniel noboa. [ 101 ] noboa supports lgbtq rights and has denounced discrimination . [ 102 ] in his first government plan, he proposed improved access to gender-affirming hormone therapy and psychotherapy for trans people. [ 103 ] in his second government plan, he plans to expand comprehensive sexual and reproductive health services, including safe abortion access, prenatal care, and sexual education. he has also proposed programs to prevent discrimination against women and lgbtq+ groups, including educational programs for healthy relationships and gender equality. [ 104 ] in 2018, he married gabriela goldbaum. [ 105 ] they had a daughter and later divorced. [ 106 ] in june 2021, a complaint filed by noboa was accepted by a spanish court to investigate the insurance company mapfre . this was related to an alleged violation of privacy and disclosure of secrets involving data used by goldbaum during their divorce. [ 107 ] in 2019, while still married to goldbaum, noboa met the social media influencer lavinia valbonesi and hired her as his personal nutritionist. they got married in 2021 and have two sons.

general elections were held in ecuador on 9 february 2025. [ 1 ] as no presidential candidate secured an outright majority, a run-off was conducted on 13 april 2025. incumbent president daniel noboa was re-elected for a full term, defeating luisa gonzález of the citizen revolution movement in a rematch. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] the elections also included selecting members of the national assembly , the 21 provincial assemblies, and ecuador's representatives to the andean parliament to serve full four-year terms. in the first round, noboa had received 44.17% of the vote, slightly ahead of gonzález, who received 44%. [ 4 ] the coalition formed by the citizen revolution movement and the reto movement , led by former president rafael correa , secured a narrow plurality in the national assembly with 67 seats, followed closely by noboa's national democratic action party with 66 seats. voter turnout for the first round was approximately 82%. [ 5 ] on 12 april 2025, a state of emergency was declared leading up to the second round. [ 6 ] in the second round, noboa received 55.63% of the vote, defeating gonzález by 11.25 percentage points. the result exceeded expectations, with noboa's campaign notable for its focus on young voters. [ 7 ] [ 8 ] gonzález demanded a recount, [ 9 ] claiming the results had discrepancies with pre-election polls [ 10 ] and exit polls [ 11 ] and were fraudulent. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] several media outlets said that gonzález's claims of fraud lacked evidence. [ 7 ] [ 14 ] [ 8 ] [ 15 ] international observers, including the european union and the organization of american states , determined the elections were free and fair, rejecting claims of fraud. [ 16 ] [ 17 ] the 2025 election was held after an early election in 2023 after former president guillermo lasso invoked the ' muerte cruzada ', just days before a congressional impeachment vote. that constitutional mechanism dissolved the national assembly and triggered a snap election . in that election, daniel noboa was elected to complete lasso's unfinished term, which runs until may 2025. [ 18 ] the 2025 election saw ecuador returning to its regular electoral schedule to determine the president and vice president for a full four-year term, alongside members of the national assembly. [ 18 ] the president is elected using a modified two-round system , with a candidate required to get over 50% of the vote, or get over 40% of the vote and be 10 points ahead of their nearest rival, to be elected in the first round. [ 19 ] the president is limited to two consecutive four-year terms. [ 19 ] [ 20 ] however, noboa is serving the remaining term of guillermo lasso , whose invoking of muerte cruzada called for the 2023 snap general elections and his early conclusion of his presidency. [ 21 ] members of the national assembly are elected by three methods. [ 20 ] fifteen are elected by closed list proportional representation in a nationwide constituency. six are elected by overseas voters (two each from canada/united states, latin america and asia/europe/oceania). the remaining 116 members are elected from multi-member constituencies by closed list proportional representation, with all seats allocated using the webster method . [ 22 ] [ 23 ] members of the national assembly are limited to two four-year terms, regardless if they are consecutive or not. [ 23 ] there are gender quotas for the party lists, meaning there is alternation between men and women . there are no quotas for minority representation. [ 20 ] the following candidates have officially submitted their candidacy through the cne and were eliminated in the first round of voting: [ 27 ] [ 28 ] the following pre-candidates were selected in the primaries of the national parties and were eligible for inscription but were not notable enough due to lack of coverage or not being present in a national opinion poll: the following notable individuals were the subject of speculation about their possible candidacy but publicly denied interest in running or were rejected as pre-candidates and declined to pursue their candidacies. on election day, the government deployed armored vehicles and soldiers carrying machine guns to secure polling booths while the country's land borders were closed. [ 62 ] noboa's behavior during the official campaign period was criticized by the suspended vice president and the opposition. [ 63 ] [ 64 ] he faced accusations of misusing public funds, engaging in lawfare against his detractors and exploiting public resources. [ 65 ] [ 66 ] there had been criticism regarding his social media advertising, which allegedly utilized bots and fake accounts. [ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] a legal dispute has been ongoing since noboa's refusal to relinquish his office during the official electoral period, which was intended for his vice president, verónica abad rojas according to campaign law. noboa told congress stating, "today, i will be president of ecuador until 5 p.m. and will resume office at 11:59 p.m." while he attended political rallies. [ 70 ] [ 71 ] on other occasions, he had his secretary inform congress that she was temporarily assuming the presidency. [ 72 ] abad had previously been suspended in november 2024 by the labor ministry for 150 days. [ 73 ] her suspension was lifted by a judge in december 2024, ordering the labor ministry to give her an apology for the suspension. [ 74 ] on 30 march 2025, noboa caused controversy for ignoring the constitutional court and appointing cynthia gellibert by decree as vice president, suspending abad once again, who was disenfranchised for two years by the tce in a 3–2 decision issued in a gender-based political violence counterclaim filed by foreign minister gabriela sommerfeld following abad's initial lawsuit against noboa and others for alleged harassment. [ 75 ] [ 76 ] analysts said noboa was focused on institutional stability and a leadership aligned with his vision of government, which reinforced his political strategy in the wake of this election. [ 77 ] noboa declared a state of emergency in seven of ecuador's provinces leading up to the runoff election. [ 6 ] according to european union observers, the candidates were able to campaign without restrictions, and the freedoms of assembly and movement were guaranteed, despite the state of exception in force. freedoms of expression and the press were also respected. [ 78 ] the observers noted, however, president noboa's failure to apply to the assembly for a 'licence' at the start of the campaign contributed to blurring the boundaries between the role of candidate and the role of president and that the fraud narrative by gonzález despite the election being transparent was problematic. [ 79 ] preliminary results in the first round showed no candidate in the presidential election had won an outright majority. [ 80 ] daniel noboa received 44.17% of the vote, followed by luisa gonzález at 43.97%. turnout was estimated at around 82%. [ 5 ] [ 81 ] on 24 february 2025, the plenary of the cne approved the numerical results of the 2025 general elections. after approval, three days were given for political organizations to file appeals with the cne or the tce if they considered it necessary. [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] the final results for the presidential candidates were released on 12 march 2025. luisa gonzález achieved 44% (4,510,860 votes) and daniel noboa 44.17% (4,527,606 votes). the difference between them was 16,746 votes. [ 85 ] during the election, noboa's mother, anabella azín was elected to the national assembly to represent the national constituency. [ 86 ] in the second round, noboa received 55.63% of the vote, defeating gonzález by 11.25 percentage points. the result exceeded expectations based on pre-election polling, with noboa's campaign notable for its focus on young voters. [ 7 ] noboa was congratulated by various international leaders. gonzález refused to concede and has requested a recount, alleging fraud without providing evidence. [ 87 ] [ 8 ] international observers, including the european union and the organization of american states , confirmed the elections were free and fair. [ 16 ] noboa held a victory rally in olón [ es ] , calling it a "historic victory," saying: "a victory by more than 10 points, a victory by over a million votes, leaving no doubt about who the winner is." [ 88 ] gonzález refused to concede, claiming election fraud without evidence. [ 7 ] [ 8 ] in the national assembly, the coalition formed by the citizen revolution movement and the reto movement , led by former president rafael correa , secured a narrow plurality with 67 seats, followed closely by noboa's national democratic action party with 66 seats. mónica salazar soon after left the citizen revolution movement, reducing rc-reto to 66 seats. [ 89 ] most smaller parties collapsed in seat share, save for pachakutik , which won 9 seats. in the andean parliament, the adn won three of ecuador's five seats to rc-reto's two. after the results, adn cancelled a planned party celebration in a hotel in northern quito, and noboa did not make public declarations. [ 90 ] the next day, he posted a written statement on twitter thanking his voters. [ 91 ] gonzález, in a party meeting in quito , said she would have dialogues with the other candidates. [ 92 ] in the context of the polarization in the national assembly between left- and right-wing political factions, the nine elected pachakutik deputies play a crucial role. the citizen's movement can only achieve an absolute majority of 76 seats by forming a formal alliance with the pachakutik party. [ 93 ] on the other hand, noboa can secure a majority if he obtains support from at least one dissident deputy from the opposition. [ 93 ] [ 94 ] on the election day, diego tello flores, a senior high-ranking official, announced the results of a post-electoral voter poll. [ 95 ] he claimed to be the only one of the four pollsters authorized by his former employer, the cne, to conduct this poll. according to his findings, daniel noboa was leading luisa gonzález by nearly 8 points, securing 50.12% of the votes and winning the election in the first round. [ 95 ] this announcement led to significant controversy, with officials from the citizen revolution movement accusing him of fraud, as such polls typically have a minimal margin of error. [ 95 ] [ 96 ] tello reiterated in a live interview on teleamazon that he had been compensated by the firm estrategas and acted independently from the government. however, estrategas quickly released a statement denying the company had paid him and that it had any participation in that particular poll. [ 97 ] [ 98 ] in the aftermath of the tello flores poll, rafael correa and andrés arauz expressed concerns about a potential coup attempt by noboa. [ 99 ] [ 100 ] however their claims did not come to happen, and the run-off elections proceeded as usual. [ 101 ] on 11 february, in his first interview after the elections, noboa claimed he had evidence of fraud, which he alleged was confirmed by an organization of american states report. however, officials from the oas dismissed this claim, clarifying that no abnormalities had been detected at that time. [ 102 ] [ 103 ] noboa also alleged that armed groups associated with drug trafficking were intentionally released from prisons to intimidate voters into supporting the citizens' revolution. this claim was dismissed by national assembly president viviana veloz , as well as by luisa gonzález and rafael correa. [ 104 ] on 17 february, andrés arauz filed a formal demand with the electoral disputes tribunal (tce; tribunal contencioso electoral [ es ] ) to contest the results of 700 polling station minutes from esmeraldas province , as well as hundreds from sucumbíos province , saying that it would be sufficient to secure the election of two national deputies, increasing the number of national assembly seats for the citizens revolution party from 67 to a total of 69, which was rejected. [ 105 ] the cne said that several people, including poll workers, were arrested during the run-off vote on 13 april for electoral anomalies that included double voting and reports of counterfeit, pre-marked ballots. seventeen people were caught taking photos of their ballots despite a ban imposed by the cne due to reports of voter coercion by criminal groups. [ 106 ] on 12 february, leonidas iza categorically rejected any negotiations with noboa's party, the adn. he announced that several meetings would take place within conaie ( confederation of indigenous nationalities of ecuador ) and its political arm, the pachakutik party, to determine their stance on a potential alliance with the citizens' revolution for the second presidential round and beyond. [ 107 ] [ 108 ] on 13 february, diego borja, the vice-presidential candidate for citizens revolution, expressed a desire to initiate a joint program with pachakutik. the primary objective is to establish a national constituent assembly that includes the proposal to redefine ecuador as a plurinational state , akin to bolivia. [ 109 ] on 19 february, leonidas iza announced the convocation of an expanded grand council for 7 march 2025, where indigenous peoples would make the final decision on currently debated proposals for a programmatic political alliance with the citizens' revolution movement. [ 110 ] on 14 february the social christian party announced that they would support daniel noboa in the second round, saying "we have never supported or voted for rafael correa in any election". [ 111 ] on 12 march, conaie's branch in the amazon region, confeniae, endorsed noboa, triggering a dispute within the organization and in pachakutik. [ 112 ] on 30 march, pachakutik endorsed luisa gonzález after she had agreed to 25 demands listed by the party. [ 112 ] in quito and guayaquil , noboa supporters celebrated in the streets. [ 113 ] the following day, support for gonzález's call for a recount had dwindled as several prominent politicians of the citizen revolution movement said noboa had won, including leonardo orlando, the prefect of manabí province , the prefects of guayas and pichincha, as well as aquiles alvarez, the mayor of guayaquil who added that "the worst is to be a bad loser". [ 114 ] pachakutik, "with total respect for democracy", congratulated noboa for his re-election. [ 115 ] the social christian party also congratulated noboa. [ 116 ] the cne dismissed the claims of fraud, saying the process had been "totally transparent." it added gonzález had not yet made a formal request for a recount. [ 117 ] reto congratulated noboa and announced they would support his administration in the national assembly. [ 118 ] on 19 april, the ministry of government declared a state of “maximum alert” over an assassination plot against noboa. in a statement named “the revenge of the bad losers", it said "all security protocols have been activated” due to the threat emanating from “criminal organizations, in collusion with political groups defeated at the polls”. [ 119 ] the heads of both missions of international observers from the eu and the oas monitored the vote and said the voting atmosphere was one of "normality", [ 88 ] as well as free and fair. [ 16 ] secretary general of the organization of american states , luis almagro, said noboa's win was consistent with what oas officials observed during voting. [ 114 ] us president donald trump congratulated noboa and said he would not disappoint the ecuadorian people, with the u.s. state department calling the election free and fair. [ 114 ] noboa was also congratulated by french president emmanuel macron , [ 120 ] argentine president javier milei , [ 121 ] brazilian president luiz inácio lula da silva , [ 122 ] chilean president gabriel boric , [ 123 ] ukrainian president volodymyr zelenskyy , [ 124 ] and uruguayan president yamandú orsi . [ 125 ] gonzález meanwhile received support from colombian president gustavo petro , [ 126 ] mexican president claudia sheinbaum , [ 127 ] and venezuelan president nicolás maduro , who said he denounced the "horrible fraud". [ 128 ]

the president of ecuador ( spanish : presidente del ecuador ), officially called the constitutional president of the republic of ecuador ( spanish : presidente constitucional de la república del ecuador ), [ 2 ] serves as the head of state and head of government of ecuador . it is the highest political office in the country as the head of the executive branch of government. per the current constitution that was adopted in 2008, the president can serve two four-year terms. prior to that, the president could only serve one four-year term. the current president of ecuador is daniel noboa , who was first elected in 2023 and re-elected in 2025 . having been sworn in at age 35, noboa is the second youngest president in the country's history, after juan jose flores . [ 3 ] the presidency of ecuador has been marked by periods of instability, causing the office to change presidents frequently throughout the history of the country . at least five times, the president's duties have been charged to a provisional government or a military junta . often, the office has been left to an interim or acting president, many of whom would go on to become president. the president who has served the most terms in office is josé maría velasco ibarra , who served five. in may 2017 rafael correa became the first president in more than two decades to serve out his complete terms in office since sixto durán ballén , who served from 1992 to 1996. before correa, a period of deep political instability from 1996 to 2006 also saw a grave economic crisis in 1998–2000 . during this time, durán ballén's three elected successors, abdalá bucaram , jamil mahuad and lucio gutiérrez , were deposed in popular revolts, followed by military or legislative coups d'états, in 1997, 2000 , and 2005 , respectively. since correa, lenín moreno (2017–2021) has also completed a full 4-year presidential term, despite a large 2019 popular revolt that nearly toppled his government.

the 2010 nobel prize in literature was awarded to the peruvian writer mario vargas llosa (1936–2025) "for his cartography of structures of power and his trenchant images of the individual's resistance, revolt, and defeat." [ 1 ] the prize was announced by the swedish academy on 7 october 2010. [ 2 ] he is the first nobel laureate in literature from peru and the fifth latin american to become one after 1982 colombian laureate gabriel garcía márquez and 1971 chilean laureate pablo neruda . mario vargas llosa was one of the leading writers in the latin american boom . his extensive authorship consists mostly of novels, but also of plays, essays, literary criticisms, and journalism. his major breakthroughs include la ciudad y los perros (lit. "the city and the dogs"/trans. "the time of the hero", 1963), la casa verde ("the green house", 1965), la guerra del fin del mundo ("the war of the end of the world", 1984), and the monumental conversación en la catedral ("conversation in the cathedral", 1969). his works reflect his ardent love of storytelling. they are characterized by rich language and cover a range of genres—from autobiographical books and historical novels to erotic fiction and thrillers such as la tía julia y el escribidor ("aunt julia and the scriptwriter", 1982) and travesuras de la niña mala ("the bad girl", 2007). he has also won literary prizes such as the 1967 rómulo gallegos prize , 1986 prince of asturias award , 1994 miguel de cervantes prize , and the 1995 jerusalem prize . [ 3 ] [ 4 ] the nobel prize in literature awarded to mario vargas llosa was well received around the world. "the world recognizes the intelligence and the will of freedom and democracy by vargas llosa and it is an act of enormous justice" said alan garcía , president of peru. spanish writer javier marías said "it is one of those prizes that never or almost never needs to be discussed." [ 5 ] novelist william boyd paid tribute to "a great chroncicler of the highs and lows of our carnal and passionate adventures as human beings". [ 6 ] the prize was also celebrated by bernard kouchner , foreign minister of france, felipe calderón , president of mexico, and the king of spain juan carlos , among others. [ 5 ] vargas llosa himself said he was delighted but surprised: "for years i haven't thought about the nobel prize at all. they didn't mention me in recent years so i didn't expect it. it's been a surprise, very nice, but a surprise. at first i thought it was a joke," he told rpp noticias . [ 7 ] mario vargas llosa delivered his nobel lecture elogio de la lectura y la ficción at the swedish academy on 7 december 2010. [ 8 ] in it vargas llosa paid tribute to the power of fiction and said he believed it was essential to a healthy society. "we would be worse than we are without the good books we have read, more conformist, not as restless, more submissive, and the critical spirit, the engine of progress, would not even exist," he argued. "like writing, reading is a protest against the insufficiencies of life. when we look in fiction for what is missing in life, we are saying, with no need to say it or even to know it, that life as it is does not satisfy our thirst for the absolute – the foundation of the human condition – and should be better." [ 9 ] in his award ceremony speech on 10 december 2010 per wästberg , member of the swedish academy and chairman of the nobel committee for literature, said of vargas llosa: "mario vargas llosa's writing has shaped our image of south america and has its own chapter in the history of contemporary literature. in his early years, he was a renewer of the novel; today, an epic poet of not only latin american stature. his wide embrace enfolds all literary genres.", "vargas llosa has led us through unfamiliar milieux with an authority that lends the authenticity of a 19th-century explorer. he links the narrative tradition of balzac and tolstoy to the modernistic experiments of william faulkner ." "vargas llosa's novels never bow to diktat; they are polyphonic and open to interpretation, emphasising the diversity of latin america's social and ethnic patterns. he lends voice to the silenced and oppressed – an aesthetic feat and an ethical act. he has an unreserved interest in people – from presidents to prostitutes – and nothing is alien to him, from the arrogance of statesmen to love's subtlest plots." "vargas llosa believes in the force of literature. without literature there would be no rendition of mankind's possibilities and hidden places. it is a bulwark against prejudice, racism and intolerant nationalism, since in all great literature, men and women of the entire world are equally alive. it is harder to suppress a people that reads a lot." "so he has fought for freedom of expression and for human rights regardless of geography, and has done so with a passion for liberty and with political courage and common sense – these not always in harmony in important writers. in a time of tiresome narcissism he is what émile zola , andré gide and camus embodied: an example and a bellwether." [ 10 ]

jorge mario pedro vargas llosa, [ a ] [ b ] 1st marquess of vargas llosa (28 march 1936 – 13 april 2025), more commonly known as mario vargas llosa , was a peruvian novelist, journalist, essayist, and politician. vargas llosa was one of the most significant latin american novelists and essayists and one of the leading writers of his generation. some critics consider him to have had a more substantial international impact and worldwide audience than any other writer of the latin american boom . in 2010 , he won the nobel prize in literature for "his cartography of structures of power and his trenchant images of the individual's resistance, revolt, and defeat". vargas llosa rose to international fame in the 1960s with novels such as the time of the hero ( la ciudad y los perros , 1963/1966), the green house ( la casa verde , 1965/1968), and the monumental conversation in the cathedral ( conversación en la catedral , 1969/1975). [ c ] he wrote prolifically across various literary genres , including literary criticism and journalism. his novels include comedies, murder mysteries, historical novels, and political thrillers. he won the 1967 rómulo gallegos prize and the 1986 prince of asturias award . several of his works have been adopted as feature films, such as captain pantoja and the special service (1973/1978) and aunt julia and the scriptwriter (1977/1982). vargas llosa's perception of peruvian society and his experiences as a native peruvian influenced many of his works. increasingly, he expanded his range and tackled themes from other parts of the world. in his essays, vargas llosa criticized nationalism in different parts of the world. like many latin american writers, vargas llosa was politically active. while he initially supported the cuban revolutionary government of fidel castro , vargas llosa later became disenchanted with its policies, particularly after the imprisonment of cuban poet heberto padilla in 1971, and later identified as a liberal and held anti–left-wing ideas. he ran for the presidency of peru with the centre-right democratic front coalition in the 1990 election , advocating for liberal reforms, but lost the election to alberto fujimori in a landslide. vargas llosa continued his literary career while advocating for right-wing activists and candidates internationally following his exit from direct participation in peruvian politics. he was awarded the 1994 miguel de cervantes prize , the 1995 jerusalem prize , the 2010 nobel prize in literature, the 2012 carlos fuentes prize , and the 2018 pablo neruda order of artistic and cultural merit . in 2011, vargas llosa was made marquess of vargas llosa by the spanish king juan carlos i . in 2021, he was elected to the académie française . mario vargas llosa was born to a middle- class family [ 1 ] on 28 march 1936, in the southern peruvian provincial city of arequipa . [ 2 ] he was the only child of ernesto vargas maldonado and dora llosa ureta (the former a radio operator in an aviation company, the latter the daughter of an old criollo family), who separated a few months before his birth. [ 2 ] shortly after mario's birth, his father revealed that he was in a relationship with a german woman, from which mario's two younger half-brothers—enrique and ernesto vargas—were born. [ 3 ] vargas llosa lived with his maternal family in arequipa until a year after his parents divorced, when his maternal grandfather was named honorary consul for peru in bolivia . [ 2 ] with his mother and her family, vargas llosa then moved to cochabamba , bolivia, where he spent the early years of his childhood. [ 2 ] his maternal family, the llosas, were sustained by his grandfather, who managed a cotton farm. [ 4 ] as a child, vargas llosa was led to believe that his father had died—his mother and her family did not want to explain that his parents had separated. [ 5 ] during the government of president josé bustamante y rivero , vargas llosa's maternal grandfather, who was a cousin of bustamante y rivero, [ 6 ] obtained a diplomatic post in the northern peruvian coastal city of piura and the entire family returned to peru. [ 5 ] while in piura, vargas llosa attended elementary school at the colegio salesiano religious academy. [ 7 ] in 1946, at the age of ten, he moved to lima and met his father for the first time. [ 7 ] his parents re-established their relationship and lived in magdalena del mar , a middle-class lima suburb, during his teenage years. [ 8 ] while in lima, he studied at the colegio la salle, a catholic middle school, from 1947 to 1949. [ 9 ] when vargas llosa was fourteen, his father sent him to the leoncio prado military academy in lima. [ 10 ] at the age of 16, before his graduation, vargas llosa began working as a journalist for local newspapers. [ 11 ] he withdrew from the military academy and finished his studies in piura, where he worked for the local newspaper, la industria , and witnessed the theatrical performance of his first dramatic work, la huida del inca . [ 12 ] in 1953, during the government of manuel a. odría , vargas llosa enrolled in lima's national university of san marcos , to study law and literature. [ 13 ] while at the university, he was a member of a communist group, embracing the ideology as a reaction to the corruption and inequality endemic to latin america. [ 14 ] he married julia urquidi , his maternal uncle's sister-in-law, in 1955 at the age of 19; she was 10 years older. [ 15 ] vargas llosa began his literary career in earnest, in 1957, with the publication of his first short stories, "the leaders" ("los jefes") and "the grandfather" ("el abuelo"), while working for two peruvian newspapers. [ 16 ] upon his graduation from the national university of san marcos in 1958, he received a scholarship to study at the complutense university of madrid in spain. [ 17 ] in 1960, after his scholarship in madrid had expired, vargas llosa moved to france, under the impression that he would receive a scholarship to study there. however, upon arriving in paris , he learned that his scholarship request had been denied. [ 18 ] despite mario and julia's unexpected financial status, the couple decided to remain in paris, where he began to write prolifically, including as a ghostwriter. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] their marriage lasted only a few more years before ending in divorce in 1964. [ 20 ] a year later, vargas llosa married his first cousin , patricia llosa, [ 14 ] [ 20 ] with whom he had three children: álvaro (born 1966), a writer and editor; gonzalo (born 1967), an international civil servant; and morgana [ es ] (born 1974), a photographer. [ 21 ] vargas llosa's first novel, the time of the hero ( la ciudad y los perros ), was published in 1963. the book is set among a community of cadets in a lima military school, and the plot is based on the author's own experiences at lima's leoncio prado military academy . [ 22 ] this early piece gained wide public attention and immediate success. [ 23 ] its vitality and adept use of sophisticated literary techniques immediately impressed critics, [ 24 ] and it won the premio de la crítica española award. [ 23 ] nevertheless, its sharp criticism of the peruvian military establishment led to controversy in peru: several generals attacked the novel, claiming that it was the work of a "degenerate mind" and stating that vargas llosa was "paid by ecuador" to undermine the prestige of the peruvian army. [ 23 ] in 1965, vargas llosa published his second novel, the green house ( la casa verde ), about a brothel called "the green house" and how its quasi-mythical presence affects the lives of the characters. the main plot follows bonifacia, a girl who is about to receive the vows of the church and her transformation into la selvática , the green house's best-known prostitute . the novel was immediately acclaimed, confirming vargas llosa as an important voice of latin american narrative. [ 25 ] the green house won the first edition of the rómulo gallegos international novel prize in 1967, contending with works by veteran uruguayan writer juan carlos onetti and by gabriel garcía márquez . [ 26 ] this novel, alone, accumulated enough awards to place the author among the leading figures of the latin american boom . [ 27 ] some critics still consider the green house to be vargas llosa's finest and most important achievement. [ 27 ] indeed, latin american literary critic gerald martin suggests that the green house is "one of the greatest novels to have emerged from latin america". [ 27 ] vargas llosa's third novel, conversation in the cathedral ( conversación en la catedral ), was published in 1969, when he was 33. this ambitious narrative is the story of santiago zavala, the son of a government minister, and ambrosio, his chauffeur. [ 28 ] a random meeting at a dog pound leads the pair to a riveting conversation at a nearby bar known as "the cathedral". [ 29 ] during the encounter, zavala searches for the truth about his father's role in the murder of a notorious peruvian underworld figure, shedding light on the workings of a dictatorship along the way. [ 30 ] unfortunately for zavala, his quest results in a dead end with no answers and no sign of a better future. [ 31 ] the novel attacks the dictatorial government of odría by showing how a dictatorship controls and destroys lives. [ 23 ] the persistent theme of hopelessness makes conversation in the cathedral vargas llosa's most bitter novel. [ 31 ] vargas llosa lectured on spanish american literature at king's college london from 1969 to 1970. [ 32 ] in 1971, vargas llosa published garcía márquez: story of a deicide ( garcía márquez: historia de un deicidio ), which was his doctoral thesis for the complutense university of madrid. [ 33 ] [ 34 ] although vargas llosa wrote this book-length study about his then friend, the colombian nobel laureate writer gabriel garcía márquez, they did not speak to each other again. in 1976, vargas llosa punched garcía márquez in the face at the palacio de bellas artes in mexico city , ending the friendship. [ 35 ] neither writer publicly stated the underlying reasons for the quarrel. [ 36 ] a photograph of garcía márquez sporting a black eye was published in 2007, reigniting public interest in the feud. [ 37 ] despite the decades of silence, in 2007, vargas llosa agreed to allow part of his book to be used as the introduction to a 40th-anniversary edition of garcía márquez's one hundred years of solitude , which was re-released in spain and throughout latin america that year. [ 38 ] historia de un deicidio was also reissued in that year, as part of vargas llosa's complete works. following the monumental work conversation in the cathedral , vargas llosa's output shifted away from more serious themes such as politics and problems with society. raymond l. williams, a scholar of latin american literature, describes this phase in his writing career as "the discovery of humor". [ 39 ] his first attempt at a satirical novel was captain pantoja and the special service ( pantaleón y las visitadoras ), published in 1973. [ 40 ] this short, comic novel offers vignettes of dialogues and documents about the peruvian armed forces and a corps of prostitutes assigned to visit military outposts in remote jungle areas. [ 41 ] these plot elements are similar to vargas llosa's earlier novel the green house , but in a different form. captain pantoja and the special service is, therefore, essentially a parody of both the green house and the literary approach that novel represents. [ 41 ] vargas llosa's motivation to write the novel came from actually witnessing prostitutes being hired by the peruvian army and brought to serve soldiers in the jungle. [ 42 ] from 1974 to 1987, vargas llosa focused on his writing, but also took the time to pursue other endeavours. [ 43 ] in 1975, he co-directed an unsuccessful motion-picture adaptation of his novel, captain pantoja and the secret service . [ 43 ] in 1976 he was elected president of pen international , the worldwide association of writers and oldest human rights organization, a position he held until 1979. [ 43 ] during this time, vargas llosa frequently travelled to speak at conferences organized by international institutions such as the hebrew university of jerusalem and the university of cambridge , where he was simón bolívar professor and an overseas fellow of churchill college in 1977–78. [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] in 1977, vargas llosa was elected as a member of the peruvian academy of language . that year, he also published aunt julia and the scriptwriter ( la tía julia y el escribidor ), based in part on his marriage to his first wife, julia urquidi, to whom he dedicated the novel. [ 47 ] she later wrote a memoir, lo que varguitas no dijo ( what little vargas didn't say ), in which she gives her personal account of their relationship. she states that vargas llosa's account exaggerates many negative points in their courtship and marriage while minimizing her role of assisting his literary career. [ 48 ] aunt julia and the scriptwriter is considered one of the most striking examples of how the language and imagery of popular culture can be used in literature. [ 49 ] the novel was adapted in 1990 into a hollywood feature film, tune in tomorrow . vargas llosa's fourth major novel, the war of the end of the world ( la guerra del fin del mundo ), was published in 1981 and was his first attempt at a historical novel. [ 50 ] this work initiated a radical change in vargas llosa's style towards themes such as messianism and irrational human behaviour. [ 51 ] it recreates the war of canudos , an incident in 19th-century brazil in which an armed millenarian cult held off a siege by the national army for months. [ 52 ] as in vargas llosa's earliest work, this novel carries a sober and serious theme, and its tone is dark. [ 52 ] vargas llosa's bold exploration of humanity's propensity to idealize violence, and his account of a man-made catastrophe brought on by fanaticism on all sides, earned the novel substantial recognition. [ 53 ] because of the book's ambition and execution, critics have argued that this is one of vargas llosa's greatest literary pieces. [ 53 ] even though the novel has been acclaimed in brazil, it was initially poorly received because a foreigner was writing about a brazilian topic. [ 54 ] the book was also criticized as revolutionary and anti- socialist . [ 55 ] vargas llosa said that this book was his favourite and was his most difficult accomplishment. [ 55 ] after completing the war of the end of the world , vargas llosa began to write novels that were significantly shorter than many of his earlier books. in 1983, he finished the real life of alejandro mayta ( historia de mayta , 1984). [ 50 ] the novel focuses on a leftist insurrection that took place on 29 may 1962, in the andean city of jauja . [ 50 ] later the same year, during the sendero luminoso uprising, vargas llosa was asked by president fernando belaúnde terry to join the investigatory commission, a task force to inquire into the massacre of eight journalists at the hands of the villagers of uchuraccay . [ 56 ] the commission's main purpose was to investigate the murders to provide information regarding the incident to the public. [ 57 ] following his involvement with the investigatory commission, vargas llosa published a series of articles to defend his position in the affair. [ 57 ] in 1986, he completed his next novel, who killed palomino molero ? ( ¿quién mató a palomino molero? ), which he began writing shortly after the end of the uchuraccay investigation. [ 57 ] though the plot of this mystery novel is similar to the tragic events at uchuraccay, literary critic roy boland points out that it was not an attempt to reconstruct the murders, but rather a "literary exorcism" of vargas llosa's own experiences on the commission. [ 58 ] the experience also inspired one of vargas llosa's later novels, death in the andes ( lituma en los andes ), originally published in 1993 in barcelona. [ 59 ] it was almost 20 years before vargas llosa wrote another major work: the feast of the goat ( la fiesta del chivo ), a political thriller , was published in 2000 (and in english in 2001). according to williams, it is vargas llosa's most complete and most ambitious novel since the war of the end of the world . [ 60 ] critic sabine koellmann sees it in the line of his earlier novels such as conversation in the cathedral depicting the effects of authoritarianism, violence and the abuse of power on the individual. [ 61 ] based on the dictatorship of rafael trujillo , who governed the dominican republic from 1930 until his assassination in 1961, the novel has three main strands: one concerns urania cabral, the daughter of a former politician and trujillo loyalist, who returns for the first time since leaving the dominican republic after trujillo's assassination 30 years earlier; the second concentrates on the assassination itself, the conspirators who carry it out, and its consequences; and the third and final strand deals with trujillo himself in scenes from the end of his regime. [ 60 ] the book quickly received positive reviews in spain and latin america [ 62 ] and is regarded as one of vargas llosa's best works. [ 60 ] in 2003, he wrote the way to paradise in which he studies flora tristan and paul gauguin . in 2006, vargas llosa wrote the bad girl ( travesuras de la niña mala ), which journalist kathryn harrison argues is a rewrite (rather than simply a recycling) of gustave flaubert 's madame bovary (1856). [ 63 ] in vargas llosa's version, the plot relates the decades-long obsession of its narrator, a peruvian expatriate in paris, with a woman with whom he first fell in love when both were teenagers. in 2019 he published the novel harsh times ( tiempos recios ), about the 1954 coup in guatemala . [ 64 ] in 2023, vargas llosa announced that he would publish his final novel, le dedico mi silencio ( i give you my silence ), and retire. [ 65 ] [ 66 ] like many other latin american intellectuals, vargas llosa was initially a supporter of the cuban revolutionary government of fidel castro . [ 25 ] he studied marxism in depth as a university student and was later persuaded by communist ideals after the success of the cuban revolution. [ 67 ] gradually, vargas llosa came to believe that socialism was incompatible with what he considered to be general liberties and freedoms. [ 68 ] the official rupture between the writer and the policies of the cuban government occurred with the "padilla affair", when the castro regime imprisoned the poet heberto padilla for a month in 1971. [ 69 ] vargas llosa, along with other intellectuals of the time, wrote to castro protesting the cuban political system and its imprisonment of the poet. [ 70 ] vargas llosa identified himself with liberalism rather than extreme left-wing political ideologies thereafter. [ 71 ] after he relinquished his earlier leftism, he opposed both left- and right-wing authoritarian regimes. [ 72 ] with his appointment to the investigatory commission on the uchuraccay massacre [ es ] in 1983, he experienced what literary critic jean franco calls "the most uncomfortable event in [his] political career". [ 59 ] unfortunately for vargas llosa, his involvement with the investigatory commission led to immediate negative reactions and defamation from the peruvian press; many suggested that the massacre was a conspiracy to keep the journalists from reporting the presence of government paramilitary forces in uchuraccay . [ 57 ] the commission concluded that it was the indigenous villagers who had been responsible for the killings; for vargas llosa the incident showed "how vulnerable democracy is in latin america and how easily it dies under dictatorships of the right and left". [ 73 ] these conclusions, and vargas llosa personally, came under intense criticism: anthropologist enrique mayer, for instance, accused him of "paternalism", [ 74 ] while fellow anthropologist carlos iván degregori criticized him for his ignorance of the andean world. [ 75 ] vargas llosa was accused of actively colluding in a government cover-up of army involvement in the massacre. [ 57 ] american latin american literature scholar misha kokotovic summarizes that the novelist was charged with seeing "indigenous cultures as a 'primitive' obstacle to the full realization of his western model of modernity". [ 76 ] shocked both by the atrocity itself and then by the reaction his report had provoked, vargas llosa responded that his critics were apparently more concerned with his report than with the hundreds of peasants who later died at the hands of the sendero luminoso guerrilla organization. [ 77 ] in 1987, he helped form and soon became a leader of the centre-right party movimiento libertad . [ 78 ] the following year his party entered a coalition with the parties of peru's two principal conservative politicians at the time, ex-president fernando belaúnde terry (of the popular action party) and luis bedoya reyes (of the popular christian party ), to form the tripartite centre-right coalition known as frente democrático (fredemo). [ 78 ] he ran for the presidency of peru in 1990 as the candidate of the fredemo coalition with the support of the united states. [ 79 ] many of peru's political elite in the 21st century began their careers in fredemo. [ 80 ] he proposed neoliberal policies—similar to those later adopted by alberto fujimori—that included a drastic economic austerity program that frightened most of the country's poor; this program emphasized the need for privatization, a market economy, free trade, and most importantly, the dissemination of private property. [ 81 ] [ 82 ] vargas llosa, according to rospigliosi, inspired some of the objectives drafted by the peruvian armed forces in the plan verde , specifically in the volume titled driving peru into the xxi century , which outlined peru becoming a neoliberal country and called for the extermination of vulnerable populations deemed as economically burdensome. [ 83 ] members of the peruvian armed forces who drafted the plan verde initially expected vargas llosa to win the presidency and support their objectives. [ 84 ] [ 83 ] although vargas llosa won the first round with 34% of the vote, he was defeated by a then-unknown agricultural engineer, alberto fujimori , in the subsequent run-off. [ 82 ] vargas llosa included an account of his run for the presidency in the memoir a fish in the water ( el pez en el agua , 1993). [ 85 ] vargas llosa mainly lived in madrid from the 1990s onwards, but spent roughly three months of the year in peru with his extended family. [ 82 ] [ 86 ] he also frequently visited london where he occasionally spent long periods. vargas llosa acquired spanish citizenship in 1993, [ 87 ] [ 88 ] though he still held peruvian nationality . [ 89 ] the writer often reiterated his love for both countries. in his nobel prize acceptance speech he observed: "i carry peru deep inside me because that is where i was born, grew up, was formed, and lived those experiences of childhood and youth that shaped my personality and forged my calling." he then added: "i love spain as much as peru, and my debt to her is as great as my gratitude. if not for spain, i never would have reached this podium or become a known writer." [ 90 ] vargas llosa accepted dominican nationality in 2023. [ 87 ] mario vargas llosa served as a visiting professor of latin american studies at harvard university during the 1992–1993 academic year. [ 91 ] harvard later recognized vargas llosa by conferring upon him an honorary doctor of letters degree in 1999. [ 92 ] in 1994 he was elected a member of the real academia española (royal spanish academy) and took up its l seat on 15 january 1996. [ 93 ] [ 94 ] vargas llosa joined the mont pelerin society in 2014. [ 95 ] he was also a member of washington, d.c.–based think tank, the inter-american dialogue . [ 96 ] vargas llosa was named in both the panama papers (2016) and pandora papers (2021) released by the international consortium of investigative journalists . [ 97 ] according to idl-reporteros , the british virgin islands company melek investing inc. was documented to be owned by vargas llosa, and was used for book royalty profits and the sale of real estate in london and madrid. [ 97 ] following the panama papers leak in 2016, carmen balcells said on behalf of vargas llosa that investments were made "without the consent of messrs. vargas llosa", while in the 2021 pandora papers leaks, javier martín, a representative of vargas llosa, said the writer "was not aware of the ownership of that company". [ 97 ] idl-reporteros provided a document showing vargas llosa's signature on a "consent to act as director" form for melek investing inc. as part of the 2021 leak. [ 97 ] vargas llosa's style encompasses historical material as well as his own experiences. [ 98 ] for example, in his first novel, the time of the hero , his own experiences at the leoncio prado military school informed his depiction of the corrupt social institution which mocked the moral standards it was supposed to uphold. [ 22 ] furthermore, the corruption of the book's school is a reflection of the corruption of peruvian society at the time the novel was written. [ 24 ] vargas llosa frequently used his writing to challenge the inadequacies of society, such as demoralization and oppression by those in political power towards those who challenge this power. one of the main themes he explored in his writing is the individual's struggle for freedom within an oppressive reality. [ 99 ] for example, his two-volume novel conversation in the cathedral is based on the tyrannical dictatorship of president manuel a. odría . [ 100 ] the protagonist, santiago, rebels against the suffocating dictatorship by participating in the subversive activities of leftist political groups. [ 101 ] in addition to themes such as corruption and oppression, vargas llosa's second novel, the green house , explores "a denunciation of peru's basic institutions", dealing with issues of abuse and exploitation of the workers in the brothel by corrupt military officers. [ 39 ] many of vargas llosa's earlier novels were set in peru, while in later work he expanded to other regions of latin america, such as brazil and the dominican republic. [ 102 ] his responsibilities as a writer and lecturer allowed him to travel frequently and led to settings for his novels in regions outside of peru. [ 43 ] the war of the end of the world was his first major work set outside peru. [ 23 ] though the plot deals with historical events of the canudos revolt against the brazilian government, the novel is not based directly on historical fact; rather, its main inspiration is the non-fiction account of those events published by brazilian writer euclides da cunha in 1902. [ 52 ] the feast of the goat , based on the dictatorship of rafael trujillo , takes place in the dominican republic ; [ 60 ] in preparation for this novel, vargas llosa undertook a comprehensive study of dominican history. [ 103 ] the novel was characteristically realist , and vargas llosa underscored that he "respected the basic facts, ... i have not exaggerated", but at the same time he pointed out "it's a novel, not a history book, so i took many, many liberties." [ 104 ] one of vargas llosa's later novels, the way to paradise ( el paraíso en la otra esquina ), is set largely in tahiti in french polynesia . [ 105 ] based on the biography of social reformer flora tristan , it demonstrates how flora and paul gauguin were unable to find paradise, but were still able to inspire followers to keep working towards a socialist utopia . [ 106 ] unfortunately, vargas llosa was not as successful in transforming these historical figures into fiction. some critics, such as barbara mujica , argue that the way to paradise lacks the "audacity, energy, political vision, and narrative genius" that was present in his previous works. [ 107 ] the works of mario vargas llosa are viewed as both modernist and postmodernist novels. [ 108 ] though there is still much debate over the differences between modernist and postmodernist literature, literary scholar m. keith booker claims that the difficulty and technical complexity of vargas llosa's early works, such as the green house and conversation in the cathedral , are elements of the modern novel. [ 27 ] furthermore, these earlier novels all carry a certain seriousness of attitude—another important defining aspect of modernist art. [ 108 ] by contrast, his later novels such as captain pantoja and the special service , aunt julia and the scriptwriter , the real life of alejandro mayta , and the storyteller ( el hablador ) appear to follow a postmodernist mode of writing. [ 109 ] these novels have a much lighter, farcical , and comic tone, characteristics of postmodernism. [ 41 ] comparing two of vargas llosa's novels, the green house and captain pantoja and the special service , booker discusses the contrast between modernism and postmodernism found in the writer's works: while both novels explore the theme of prostitution as well as the workings of the peruvian military, booker points out that the former is gravely serious whereas the latter is ridiculously comic. [ 41 ] literary scholar m. keith booker argues that vargas llosa perfects the technique of interlacing dialogues in his novel the green house . [ 41 ] by combining two conversations that occur at different times, he creates the illusion of a flashback . vargas llosa also sometimes used this technique as a means of shifting location by weaving together two concurrent conversations happening in different places. [ 110 ] this technique is a staple of his repertoire, which he began using near the end of his first novel, the time of the hero . [ 111 ] however, he did not use interlacing dialogues in the same way in all of his novels. for example, in the green house the technique is used in a serious fashion to achieve a sober tone and to focus on the interrelatedness of important events separated in time or space. [ 112 ] in contrast, captain pantoja and the special service employs this strategy for comic effects and uses simpler spatial shifts. [ 113 ] this device is similar to both virginia woolf 's mixing of different characters' soliloquies and gustave flaubert's counterpoint technique in which he blends conversation with other events, such as speeches. [ 110 ] this was seen to occur yet again in vargas llosa's penultimate novel, tiempos recios , as two dialogues, one between trujillo and castillo armas, and another between trujillo and abbes garcía, are juxtaposed. vargas llosa's first literary influences were relatively obscure peruvian writers such as martín adán , carlos oquendo de amat , and césar moro . [ 114 ] as a young writer, he looked to these revolutionary novelists in search of new narrative structures and techniques to delineate a more contemporary, multifaceted experience of urban peru. he was looking for a style different from the traditional descriptions of land and rural life made famous by peru's foremost novelist at the time, josé maría arguedas . [ 115 ] vargas llosa wrote of arguedas's work that it was "an example of old-fashioned regionalism that had already exhausted its imaginary possibilities". [ 114 ] although he did not share arguedas's passion for indigenous reality, vargas llosa admired and respected the novelist for his contributions to peruvian literature. [ 116 ] indeed, he published a book-length study on his work, la utopía arcaica (1996). rather than restrict himself to peruvian literature, vargas llosa also looked abroad for literary inspiration. two french figures, existentialist jean-paul sartre and novelist gustave flaubert , influenced both his technique and style. [ 117 ] sartre's influence is most prevalent in vargas llosa's extensive use of conversation. [ 118 ] the epigraph of the time of the hero , his first novel, is also taken directly from sartre's work. [ 119 ] flaubert's artistic independence—his novels' disregard of reality and morals— was always admired by vargas llosa, [ 120 ] who wrote a book-length study of flaubert's aesthetics , the perpetual orgy . [ 121 ] in his analysis of flaubert, vargas llosa questioned the revolutionary power of literature in a political setting; this is in contrast to his earlier view that "literature is an act of rebellion", thus marking a transition in vargas llosa's aesthetic beliefs. [ 122 ] other critics such as sabine köllmann argue that his belief in the transforming power of literature is one of the great continuities that characterize his fictional and non-fictional work, and link his early statement that 'literature is fire' with his nobel prize speech 'in praise of reading and writing'. [ 123 ] one of vargas llosa's favourite novelists, and arguably the most influential on his writing career, was the american william faulkner . [ 124 ] vargas llosa considered faulkner "the writer who perfected the methods of the modern novel". [ 125 ] both writers' styles include intricate changes in time and narration. [ 118 ] [ 125 ] in the time of the hero , for example, aspects of vargas llosa's plot, his main character's development and his use of narrative time are influenced by his favourite faulkner novel, light in august . [ 126 ] in addition to the studies of arguedas and flaubert, vargas llosa wrote literary criticisms of other authors that he admired, such as gabriel garcía márquez, albert camus , ernest hemingway , and jean-paul sartre . [ 127 ] the main goals of his non-fiction works are to acknowledge the influence of these authors on his writing, and to recognize a connection between himself and the other writers; [ 127 ] critic sara castro-klarén argues that he offers little systematic analysis of these authors' literary techniques. [ 127 ] in the perpetual orgy , for example, he discusses the relationship between his own aesthetics and flaubert's, rather than focusing on flaubert's alone. [ 128 ] after distancing himself from left-wing politics , he embraced right-wing politics . [ 129 ] in 1989, the washington post wrote that though vargas llosa's party appeared centre-right , "he has ties with far-right politicians in other countries". [ 130 ] vargas llosa continued to be criticized due to his association with far-right groups and politicians. [ 131 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] the christian science monitor called vargas llosa "a right-wing maverick" [ 80 ] while the socialist magazine jacobin described him as a "far-right novelist". [ 136 ] vargas llosa described himself as a supporter of liberalism and said that the individuals who have had most impact on his political thought have included karl popper , friedrich hayek , and isaiah berlin . [ 129 ] according to the nation , vargas llosa would condemn leftist groups entirely due to the controversies of some while minimizing similar actions by neoliberal governments. [ 129 ] vargas llosa was also one of the 25 leading figures on the information and democracy commission launched in 2018 by reporters without borders . [ 137 ] he supported right-wing libertarian candidate javier milei in the 2023 argentine general election . [ 138 ] following the arrest of augusto pinochet for crimes against humanity in 1999, vargas llosa wrote an op-ed in the new york times asking why left wing dictators were also not being arrested. [ 139 ] during the 2021 chilean general election , vargas llosa expressed support for conservative presidential candidate josé antonio kast . [ 132 ] [ 139 ] during the 2022 brazilian general election , vargas llosa expressed his endorsement for brazilian president jair bolsonaro . [ 140 ] "the case of bolsonaro it's a hard question. his jokes are very hard to endorse, for a liberal [...] now, between bolsonaro and lula , i prefer bolsonaro. even with jokes from bolsonaro, lula no." said vargas llosa at a conference. [ 141 ] a month after losing the 1990 election , at the invitation of octavio paz , vargas llosa attended a conference in mexico entitled, "the 20th century: the experience of freedom". focused on the collapse of communist rule in central and eastern europe, it was broadcast on mexican television from 27 august to 2 september. addressing the conference on 30 august 1990, vargas llosa embarrassed his hosts by condemning the mexican system of power based on the rule of the institutional revolutionary party (pri), which had been in power for 61 years. criticizing the pri by name, he commented, "i don't believe that there has been in latin america any case of a system of dictatorship that has so efficiently recruited the intellectual milieu, bribing it with great subtlety." he declared, "mexico is the perfect dictatorship. the perfect dictatorship is not communism, not the ussr, not fidel castro; the perfect dictatorship is mexico. because it is a camouflaged dictatorship." [ 142 ] [ 143 ] the statement "mexico is the perfect dictatorship" became a cliché in mexico [ 144 ] and internationally, until the pri lost power in 2000 . in april 2011, during the 2011 general election , vargas llosa said he was going to vote for alejandro toledo (who had already served as president from 2001 to 2006). after casting his vote, he said his country should stay in the path of legality and freedom. [ 145 ] [ 146 ] after her introduction into politics, vargas llosa had a complex opinion on conservative politician keiko fujimori , daughter of president of peru alberto fujimori . during her candidacy in the 2011 general election, vargas llosa said "the worst option is that of keiko fujimori because it means the legitimation of one of the worst dictatorships that peru has had in its history", endorsing and calling for peruvian voters to consider left-wing candidate ollanta humala over fujimori in the second-round ballot. [ 147 ] after fujimori announced her candidacy for the 2016 general election , vargas llosa said in 2014, "keiko is the daughter of a murderer and a thief who is imprisoned, tried by civil courts with international observers, sentenced to 25 years in prison for murder and theft. i do not want her to win the elections." [ 148 ] however, in the second round of the 2021 general election , vargas llosa expressed support for keiko, sharing opposition to far-left candidate pedro castillo and describing fujimori as the "lesser of two evils". [ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] french intellectuals, who criticized his admission to the académie française , said that vargas llosa contributed to the peruvian political crisis during the 2021 general election. [ 134 ] in february 2008 he ended his support for the people's party in favour of the recently created union, progress and democracy , claiming that certain conservative views held by the former party are at odds with his classical liberal beliefs. his political ideologies appear in the book política razonable , written with fernando savater , rosa díez , álvaro pombo , albert boadella , and carlos martínez gorriarán . [ 152 ] he continued to write, both journalism and fiction, and to travel extensively. he also taught as a visiting professor at a number of prominent universities. [ 153 ] vargas llosa was opposed to catalan independence from spain. attending an anti-independence rally in october 2017 in barcelona , he said: "spanish democracy is here to stay. no separatist conspiracy can destroy it." [ 154 ] in 2021, he attended a rally against the pardon of the catalan independence leaders in madrid. [ 155 ] [ 156 ] vargas llosa was an agnostic , "i was not a believer, nor was i an atheist either, but, rather, an agnostic". [ 157 ] vargas llosa declared himself a music lover and stated that he felt a special fondness for gustav mahler . [ 158 ] he was fond of association football and was a supporter of universitario de deportes . [ 159 ] in his book a fish in the water he confessed that from childhood he was a fan of the 'cream coloured' team from peru, which he first saw play one day in 1946 when he was only 10 years old. [ 160 ] in february 2011, vargas llosa was awarded an honorary life membership of this football club, in a ceremony that took place at lima's monumental stadium . [ 161 ] [ 162 ] in 2015, vargas llosa embarked on a relationship with filipina spanish socialite and tv personality isabel preysler and divorced his second wife patricia llosa. [ 14 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] in december 2022, it was announced that vargas llosa and preysler had split up. [ 165 ] he was infected with covid-19 and was hospitalized in april 2022. [ 166 ] vargas llosa died on 13 april 2025 in lima at the age of 89, surrounded by his family and "at peace", his son álvaro vargas llosa said on his x account. [ 167 ] it was also announced that his remains were cremated in a private ceremony. [ 168 ] heads of state from several american countries — including claudia sheinbaum in mexico, dina boluarte in peru, gabriel boric in chile, former president luis lacalle pou in uruguay, as well as former colombian presidents álvaro uribe and iván duque — saluted vargas llosa's work and legacy. [ 169 ] president of france emmanuel macron , prime minister of spain pedro sánchez , the spanish royal family , and president of the federal republic of germany frank-walter steinmeier also paid tribute. [ 170 ] [ 171 ] [ 172 ] the peruvian government declared 14 april 2025 as a day of national mourning , with flags flown at half-mast on all public buildings and diplomatic representations, in recognition of the writer. [ 173 ] in spain, the city of marbella , where the author regularly resided, decreed two days of official mourning. [ 174 ] the community of madrid announced that it will posthumously award vargas llosa the medalla internacional de las artes. [ 175 ] vargas llosa is considered a major latin american writer, alongside other authors such as octavio paz , julio cortázar , jorge luis borges , gabriel garcía márquez , carlos fuentes , and isabel allende . [ 176 ] in his book the new novel in latin america ( la nueva novela ), fuentes offers an in-depth literary criticism of the positive influence vargas llosa's work had on latin american literature. [ 177 ] indeed, for the literary critic gerald martin , writing in 1987, vargas llosa was "perhaps the most successful ... certainly the most controversial latin american novelist of the past twenty-five years". [ 178 ] most of vargas llosa's narratives have been translated into multiple languages, marking his international critical success. [ 176 ] vargas llosa is also noted for his substantial contribution to journalism, an accomplishment shared by few other latin american writers. [ 179 ] he is recognized among those who have most consciously promoted literature in general—and, more specifically, the novel itself—as avenues for meaningful commentary about life. [ 180 ] during his career, he wrote more than a dozen novels and many other books and stories, and, for decades, he was a voice for latin american literature. [ 181 ] a number of vargas llosa's works have been adapted for the screen: peruvian director francisco lombardi adapted the time of the hero as the city and the dogs in 1985 and released a film version of captain pantoja and the special services in 1999, and vargas llosa's cousin luis llosa adapted the feast of the goat in 2005. [ 182 ] aunt julia and the scriptwriter was turned into the english-language film tune in tomorrow in 1990. the feast of the goat has also been adapted as a theatrical play by jorge alí triana , a colombian playwright and director. [ 183 ] after his death, the guardian described vargas llosa as a "giant of latin american literature", [ 184 ] while the new york times noted his impact "reverberated far beyond the borders of his native country". [ 185 ] the wall street journal called vargas llosa a "marxist-turned-free-marketeer" who explored themes of "despotism, corruption, and fanaticism" in latin america. [ 186 ] vargas llosa won numerous awards for his writing, from the 1962 premio biblioteca breve (for the time of the hero ) [ 187 ] to the 1993 premio planeta (for death in the andes ) [ 188 ] and the jerusalem prize in 1995. [ 189 ] the literary critic harold bloom included his novel the war of the end of the world in his list of essential literary works in the western canon . [ 190 ] one important distinction he received was the 1994 miguel de cervantes prize , considered the most important accolade in spanish-language literature and awarded to authors whose "work has contributed to enrich, in a notable way, the literary patrimony of the spanish language". [ 191 ] in 2002, vargas was the recipient of the pen/nabokov award . [ 192 ] vargas llosa also received the 2005 irving kristol award from the american enterprise institute [ 193 ] and was the 2008 recipient of the harold and ethel l. stellfox visiting scholar and writers award at dickinson college . [ 194 ] on 7 october 2010, the swedish academy announced that the 2010 nobel prize in literature was awarded to vargas llosa "for his cartography of structures of power and his trenchant images of the individual's resistance, revolt, and defeat". [ 195 ] the decision to award vargas llosa the nobel prize in literature was well received around the world. [ 196 ] on 18 november 2010, vargas llosa received an honorary degree of letters from the city college of new york of the city university of new york , where he also delivered the president's lecture. [ 197 ] on 4 february 2011, vargas llosa was elevated to the spanish nobility by king juan carlos i with the hereditary title of marqués de vargas llosa (marquess of vargas llosa). [ 198 ] [ 199 ] on 25 november 2021, vargas llosa was elected to the académie française . [ 200 ] vargas llosa's essays and journalism have been collected as contra viento y marea , issued in three volumes (1983, 1986, and 1990). [ 225 ] a selection (plus selected works from la verdad de las mentiras y desafíos a libertad ) has been edited by john king and translated and published as making waves ( isbn 978-0140275568 ). [ 226 ]

on 8 april 2025, the roof of the jet set nightclub in santo domingo , dominican republic, collapsed during a live performance by merengue musician rubby pérez . the structural failure occurred at approximately 12:44 a.m. ast , resulting in 232 fatalities and 225 injuries, while 189 were rescued from the rubble alive. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] it is one of the deadliest non- natural disasters in the country's history. [ 5 ] the building was opened as a movie theater in 1973. it was converted into the jet set nightclub in 1994, and underwent renovations in 2010 and 2015. featuring two-story high ceilings over an expansive, open plan dance floor able to host 1,000 standing and 700 seated visitors, the building was equipped with large air conditioners and electric generators on the rooftop, and large stage lighting and loudspeakers in the ceiling. [ 6 ] in 2023, it caught fire after lightning struck a generator on the roof, but was deemed structurally safe by firefighters. [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 6 ] civil engineers and architects have indicated that the roof was inadequately supported by narrow columns on the sides and none in the center, and could have collapsed under its own weight due to fire-weakened concrete and the heavy machinery it was carrying. [ 6 ] the jet set nightclub played live dance music on monday nights, which attracted well-known people. [ 9 ] [ 10 ] at the time of the collapse, the nightclub was hosting a concert by merengue musician rubby pérez along with hundreds of spectators. [ 10 ] the collapse occurred in the early hours of 8 april 2025, at 12:44 a.m. ast . [ 11 ] at that time, there were between 500 and 1,000 people in the club. [ 12 ] over 200 died in the collapse. [ 13 ] [ 14 ] according to eyewitness accounts, the roof gave way without warning roughly one hour into the musical performance. the cause of the structural failure remains undetermined, though investigators began examining the site once rescue operations permitted. [ 13 ] [ 15 ] a musician playing alongside rubby pérez said that the venue was full at the time of collapse, and that he initially believed an earthquake had occurred. [ 14 ] first lady of the dominican republic raquel arbaje reported that trapped governor of monte cristi province nelsy cruz telephoned president luis abinader at 12:49 a.m., shortly after the collapse. [ 16 ] an extensive search and rescue mission was initiated, with about 400 responders deployed to the disaster site. [ 14 ] first responders worked continuously to locate survivors amidst the structural debris. rubby pérez, who had been performing when the disaster occurred, reportedly began singing to help rescuers pinpoint his location within the rubble. according to pérez's daughter zulinka, who escaped from the collapse, the performer sustained injuries but remained in stable condition after he was extracted from the collapsed structure. [ 13 ] [ 15 ] however, he was later reported dead. [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] from 3 p.m. on the day of the collapse onwards, no additional survivors were recovered from the disaster site. twenty-two state agencies conducted rescue operations at the site, which included three cranes and several search dogs. [ 20 ] during rescue operations, crowds assembled outside to pray for the victims and to sing christian songs to help each other cope with the tragedy. [ 21 ] a crowd gathered in front of the national institute of forensic pathology, which projected images of the collapse victims to facilitate identification by loved ones. [ 15 ] after 8 p.m., updates were suspended until the next day, following requests made by the victims' relatives. [ 20 ] several trapped victims aided rescue efforts by crying for help, and others by phoning their families. [ 11 ] emergency services documented at least 138 ambulance transfers, though the actual number of injured individuals exceeded 150 according to national director of emergency management operations juan manuel méndez. this discrepancy was attributed to multiple casualties being sometimes transported in a single ambulance. [ 13 ] [ 14 ] at least 155 trips were made to nearby hospitals. [ 9 ] by 9 april, the dominican government announced a shift from search and rescue to recovering bodies. [ 22 ] officials with the dominican republic emergency operations center stated on 12 april that 189 were rescued from the rubble alive and 15 remained hospitalized. [ 4 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] abinader visited the disaster site on the morning of 8 april to assess the situation and affirm the government's commitment to the rescue efforts. he emphasized that "all government resources" were being utilized in the ongoing operation. [ 13 ] rescue crews from israel, puerto rico and mexico arrived in santo domingo on 9 april to assist in rescue efforts. [ 25 ] [ 26 ] mayor of santo domingo carolina mejía activated the municipal disaster response committee, and expressed condolences to families awaiting news about their loved ones. the municipal government coordinated closely with national emergency services to manage the crisis. the management of the jet set nightclub pledged their full cooperation with authorities in the investigation and in providing assistance to victims and their families. [ 13 ] mejia's office also provided 170 coffins to six funeral homes handling the remains of the victims. [ 27 ] [ better source needed ] all victims were identified by 12 april. [ 28 ] the collapse killed 232 people and injured 225 others. [ 3 ] [ 29 ] police said that those killed included former major league baseball pitcher octavio dotel , baseball player tony blanco (who died saving esteban germán ), [ 30 ] and rubby pérez . [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 31 ] national football team player luis guillén, [ 32 ] fashion designer martín polanco and national district mayor's office's director of urban infrastructure christian alejandro tejeda pichardo were confirmed dead. [ 33 ] [ 34 ] it was reported that at least 25 venezuelan citizens were inside jet set at the time of the incident, including telemicro news anchor elianta quintero [ es ] , who was injured. ten venezuelans were killed, [ 35 ] five injured and others went missing. [ 36 ] a woman from colombia was also killed, while two other colombian citizens were injured. [ 37 ] grupo popular confirmed the death of several members of its owners, the grullón family: chairman of afp popular eduardo grullón and his wife, as well as his sister and her husband. [ 38 ] president abinader also confirmed that nelsy cruz , governor of monte cristi province, was among those killed. [ 13 ] her death was attributed to injuries from falling glass. [ 39 ] an italian man, who worked as a chef in the city, and a woman with dominican–italian citizenship were also among the fatalities. [ 40 ] other foreigners were among the fatalities, including two from france and one each from haiti, kenya and costa rica. [ 35 ] [ 29 ] the number of injured victims reached more than 200 people, [ 19 ] including members of the chamber of deputies bray vargas and carlos j. gil rodríguez and the latter's wife. [ 9 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] two of rodríguez's assistants were reported missing. [ 9 ] dominican social policy cabinet coordinator tony peña guaba characterized the event as the "worst non-atmospheric disaster" in the nation's history. [ 41 ] abinader declared a three-day national period of mourning from 8 to 10 april, lowering all national flags at public structures and military precincts to half-mast . [ 42 ] on 10 april, he extended the mourning period to six days. [ 43 ] his office also said that a commission of national and international experts would be established to investigate the disaster. [ 44 ] the senate of the dominican republic suspended a scheduled session for all committee activities on 9 april, and it issued a statement expressing regret for the disaster. [ 45 ] in the immediate aftermath of the disaster, reports from diario libre said that santo domingo had an "unusual" decline in traffic, with fewer pedestrians and an "unusual silence". [ 46 ] a memorial service was held for rubby pérez at the eduardo brito national theater , with president abinader and first lady raquel arbaje in attendance. [ 19 ] in the hours following the disaster, the family of nelsy cruz announced that memorial services would be held at the provincial government of montecristi, with funeral proceedings scheduled for the evening of 8 april. [ 13 ] in a statement, commissioner of major league baseball robert manfred offered condolences for the deaths of governor cruz and former players octavio dotel and tony blanco. [ 9 ] new york mets player juan soto and former pitcher pedro martínez expressed their condolences to the victims' families. [ 47 ] dotel played for the st. louis cardinals , new york yankees , houston astros , toronto blue jays , detroit tigers , pittsburgh pirates , colorado rockies , and oakland athletics , and each team released social media statements mourning his death. [ 32 ] [ 48 ] dotel also played for the mets, the kansas city royals , the atlanta braves , the chicago white sox , and the los angeles dodgers . before the start of a game against the miami marlins , the mets held a tribute and moment of silence for dotel. [ 48 ] in haina , the hometown of deceased performer rubby pérez and at least 28 other victims, members of the jaineros dorados choir lit masses of candles in tribute to the deceased. [ 49 ] minister of culture roberto salcedo jr. publicly mourned the loss of governor cruz, describing her death as "an irreparable loss for her community and for the entire country" and recognizing her contributions as "a committed public servant" and "a woman of steadfast leadership". [ 13 ] celebrities who expressed solidarity and remorse for the victims and their loved ones include rappers bad bunny , daddy yankee , cardi b , and don omar ; musicians juan luis guerra , alejandro sanz , wilfrido vargas , and francisca valenzuela ; singers ricardo montaner , eddy herrera , natti natasha , thalía , marc anthony , and olga tañón ; and actress clarissa molina . [ 50 ] several members of the united states congress , including maría elvira salazar , nydia velázquez , and adriano espaillat , as well as new york state senator luis r. sepúlveda , offered condolences. [ 51 ] nicolás maduro , the president of venezuela, expressed his "most heartfelt message of condolence" to the "sister dominican republic and its people". [ 52 ] bruno rodríguez parrilla , the minister of foreign affairs of cuba, expressed on behalf of the cuban government his condolences to the dominican people and government for the loss of human life. [ 53 ] russian president vladimir putin sent his "sincere condolences" and stated that russia "shares the sorrow of the dominican people over this tragic incident". [ 54 ] the espaillat family, one of the wealthiest families in the dominican republic and the owners of the nightclub, released a statement expressing their regret. [ 16 ] in order to determine the causes of the collapse, president abinader announced the formation of a commission of national and international experts, and an investigation was begun by the attorney general of the dominican republic . [ 55 ] abinader indicated that answers must be given as to "qué pasó, por qué pasó y cómo pasó" ("what happened, why it happened, and how it happened") in the disaster. [ 56 ] [ 55 ] a separate technical investigation is being carried out by the dominican national office for seismic assessment and vulnerability of infrastructure and buildings (onesvie), which is expected to be concluded in about three months. [ 55 ] on 14 april 2025, a lawsuit was filed by relatives of one of the deceased against jet set owner antonio espaillat, his mother, ana grecia lópez, the dominican government and the santo domingo mayor's office, demanding unspecified damages from them and a criminal conviction for involuntary manslaughter against the espaillats. [ 57 ]

santo domingo ( spanish pronunciation: [ˈsanto ðoˈmiŋɡo] , meaning " saint dominic ", verbatim "holy sunday"), once known as santo domingo de guzmán , is the capital and largest city of the dominican republic and the largest metropolitan area in the caribbean by population. [ 7 ] as of 2022, [update] the city center (the distrito nacional ) had a population of 1,029,110 while its metropolitan area, the greater santo domingo , had a population of 4,274,651. the city is coterminous with the boundaries of the distrito nacional ("d.n.", "national district"), [ b ] itself bordered on three sides by santo domingo province . [ 8 ] [ 9 ] santo domingo was founded in 1496 by the spanish empire and is the oldest continuously inhabited european settlement in the americas . it was the first seat of spanish colonial rule in the new world , the captaincy general of santo domingo . santo domingo is the site of the first university, cathedral, castle, monastery, and fortress in the new world. the city's colonial zone was declared as a world heritage site by unesco . [ 10 ] [ 11 ] santo domingo was called ciudad trujillo ( spanish pronunciation: [sjuˈðað tɾuˈxiʝo] ), from 1936 to 1961, after the dominican republic's dictator, rafael trujillo , named the capital after himself. following his assassination, the city resumed its original designation. santo domingo is the cultural , financial, political, commercial and industrial center of the dominican republic, with the vast majority of the country' industries being located within the city. santo domingo also serves as the chief seaport of the country. the city's harbor at the mouth of the ozama river accommodates the largest vessels, and the port handles both heavy passenger- and freight traffic. [ 12 ] prior to the arrival of christopher columbus in 1492, the native taíno people populated the island which they called kiskeya (mother of all lands) and ayiti (the land of the high mountains), and which columbus later named hispaniola , including the territory of today's republic of haiti . at the time, the island's territory consisted of five chiefdoms: marién, maguá, maguana, jaragua, and higüey. [ 13 ] these were ruled respectively by caciques (chiefs) guacanagarix, guarionex, caonabo , bohechío, and cayacoa. dating from 1493, when the spanish settled on the island, and officially from 5 august 1498, santo domingo became the oldest european city in the americas. bartholomew columbus founded the settlement and named it la nueva isabela, after la isabela , an earlier settlement in the north named after the queen of spain isabella i . [ 14 ] in 1495 it was renamed "santo domingo", in honor of saint dominic . santo domingo came to be known as the "gateway to the caribbean" and the chief town in hispaniola from then on. [ 15 ] expeditions which led to ponce de león 's colonization of puerto rico , diego velázquez de cuéllar 's colonization of cuba , hernán cortés ' conquest of mexico , and vasco núñez de balboa 's sighting of the pacific ocean were all launched from santo domingo. in june 1502, [ 16 ] santo domingo was destroyed by a major hurricane, and the new governor nicolás de ovando had it rebuilt on a different site on the other side of the ozama river . [ 17 ] [ 18 ] the original layout of the city and a large portion of its defensive wall can still be appreciated today throughout the colonial zone, declared a world heritage site by unesco . diego columbus , christopher columbus's son, arrived in 1509, assuming the powers of viceroy and admiral. in 1512, ferdinand established a real audiencia with juan ortiz de matienzo , marcelo de villalobos, and lucas vázquez de ayllón appointed as judges of appeal. in 1514, pedro ibanez de ibarra arrived with the laws of burgos . diego de medrano, from soria, was appointed royal treasurer of santo domingo. [ 19 ] rodrigo de alburquerque was named repartidor de indios and soon named visitadores to enforce the laws. [ 18 ] : 143–144, 147 the first major slave revolt in the americas occurred in santo domingo during 1521, when enslaved africans led an uprising on diego colombus's sugar plantation. in 1586, the privateer sir francis drake captured the city and held it for ransom. [ 20 ] a report which reached the english government in may 1586 states that from santo domingo he took away 1,200 englishmen, frenchmen, flemings, and "provincials out of prison, besides 800 of the countrey people". [ 21 ] drake's successful capture signaled the decline of spain's dominion over hispaniola, which was accentuated in the early 17th century by spanish policies that resulted in the depopulation of most of the island outside of the capital. an expedition sent by oliver cromwell in 1655 attacked the city of santo domingo, but the english force was repulsed by a smaller force of local militias [ 22 ] [ c ] and santo domingo suffered only 25 dead. [ 24 ] in 1697, the treaty of ryswick included the acknowledgement by spain of france's dominion over the western third of the island, now haiti . during the 18th century, privateers from santo domingo patrolled the caribbean , capturing numerous enemy merchantment . [ 25 ] from 1795 to 1822, the city changed hands several times along with the colony it headed. it was ceded to france in 1795. the city was briefly captured by haitian rebels in 1801, recovered by france in 1802, endured a failed invasion from haiti in 1805, and was once again reclaimed by spain in 1809. in 1821, santo domingo became the capital of an independent nation called the republic of spanish haiti after the criollo bourgeois within the country, led by josé núñez de cáceres , overthrew the spanish crown . the nation was annexed by haiti just two months later. the city and the colony lost much of their spanish-born peninsular population as a result of these events which caused a great deal of instability and unrest. [ 20 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] on 27 february 1844, santo domingo was again the capital of a free nation, when it gained its independence from haiti, led by dominican nationalist juan pablo duarte . the city was a prize fought over by various political factions over the succeeding decades of instability. in addition, the country had to fight multiple battles with haiti; the battle of 19 march , battle of 30 march , battle of las carreras , and battle of beler , are a few of the most prominent encounters, mentioned in the national anthem and with city streets named after them. [ 28 ] dominican victory in these engagements thwarted the advance of the haitian army towards santo domingo during the dominican war of independence . in 1861, spain returned to the country, having struck a bargain with dominican dictator pedro santana whereby the latter was granted several honorific titles and privileges, in exchange for annexing the young nation back to spanish rule. the dominican restoration war began in 1863 however, and in 1865 the bourbon queen isabella ii withdrew her soldiers from the island. over the next two-thirds of a century santo domingo and the dominican republic went through many revolutions and power changes. santo domingo would experience the first of two u.s. invasions in 1916 when different leaders fought for presidential power and control of the city. the united states intervened, instituting a military leader, harry shepard knapp . u.s. marines and dominicans clashed in santo domingo on 24–25 october 1916, resulting in the deaths of two u.s. marines and three dominicans. [ 29 ] the city was struck by hurricane san zenón in 1930, which caused major damage and killed up to 8,000 people. [ 30 ] after its rebuilding, santo domingo was known officially as ciudad trujillo due to the personality cult imposed by dictator rafael leónidas trujillo , who governed from 1930. following his assassination in 1961 the city was renamed back to santo domingo. in 1962, juan bosch was elected to the presidency. he was overthrown seven months later, resulting in a civil war in the capital. francisco caamaño led the constitucionalistas fighting to restore democracy. this would lead to the second u.s. invasion in 1965. u.s. troops engaged in heavy fighting in the streets of santo domingo against the constitucionalistas on 15 and 16 june. newsweek described it this way: amid the clatter of automatic weapons, the sharp rattle of .50-caliber guns and the heavy explosions of bazookas and recoilless rifles, the paratroopers of the 82nd u.s. airborne division blasted their way four city blocks into caamaño's bastion. heavy fire from u.s. guns across the ozama river ringed rebel headquarters on el conde street, shattered buildings and started huge fires. eventually, the fighting would end on 31 august 1965, with 2,850 dominicans and 44 american servicemen dead. [ 31 ] the year 1992 marked the 500th anniversary, el quinto centenario, of christopher columbus' discovery of the americas . the columbus lighthouse – faro a colón – was erected in santo domingo in honor of this occasion, with an approximate cost of 400 million dominican pesos . [ 32 ] santo domingo is located on the southern coast of the island of hispaniola , along the caribbean sea, and is the capital of the dominican republic. the city sits at the mouth of the ozama river , which divides it into eastern and western sections, with the historic colonial zone on the west side. its geography is characterized by a coastal plain with flat to gently rolling terrain, and the surrounding region includes some low limestone hills. the city has a tropical climate, marked by high humidity and warm temperatures year-round, with a rainy season from may to november. its coastal location and natural harbor have historically made it an important port and commercial hub in the caribbean . the ozama river flows 148 kilometers (92 miles) before emptying into the caribbean sea. santo domingo's position on its banks was of great importance to the city's economic development and the growth of trade during colonial times. the ozama river is where the country's busiest port is located. the average temperature in santo domingo varies little, because the tropical trade winds help mitigate the heat and humidity throughout the year. thanks to these trade winds, santo domingo has a borderline tropical rainforest ( köppen af )/ tropical monsoon climate ( am ), as its driest month is very close to 60 millimeters (2.4 in). however, the city seldom experiences the heat that one may expect to find. december through march are the coolest months with warm days with less humidity and cool nights (temperatures of 17 to 19 °c (63 to 66 °f)). july through september are the hottest. santo domingo averages 1,445 millimeters (56.9 in) of rain annually. its driest months are from december through april; however, due to the trade winds and mountains to the southwest, rain is seen even during these months. like many other cities in the caribbean , santo domingo is very susceptible to hurricanes. hurricane georges caused severe destruction in september 1998. the lowest recorded temperature has been 11.0 °c (51.8 °f) on 5 february 1951 and 7 january 1957 and the highest is 39.5 °c (103.1 °f) on 29 may 2002. [ 33 ] many of santo domingo's most notable landmarks are located within the zona colonial district of the city, a unesco world heritage site since 1990. the colonial zone, bordered by the río ozama, also has a collection of early 16th century buildings, including palatial houses and majestic churches that reflect the architectural style of the late middle ages . the church and convent of los dominicos is the oldest catholic building in continuous use in the americas , and was the headquarters of the first university in the americas . [ 10 ] the city's most important historical buildings include the catedral santa maría la menor , the first cathedral of the americas, which states its distinction; the alcázar de colón , the first castle in the americas, once the residence of viceroy of the indies don diego colón , a son of christopher columbus; the monasterio de san francisco , the ruins of the first monastery in the americas; the museo de las casas reales , in a monumental complex that includes the former palace of the governors and the building of the former royal audiencia of santo domingo ; the fortaleza ozama , is one of the surviving sections of the walls of santo domingo, which is the oldest military construction of european origin in the americas; the pantéon nacional , a former jesuit edifice now hosting the remains of various renowned dominicans; and the dominican convent , the first convent in the americas. [ citation needed ] on the north end of calle las damas, the restored and expanded plaza de españa is bordered by las atarazanas (former naval yard, now a museum) and a number of small shops and restaurants. this area was the first european commercial center in the americas, and is still a hub of activity today. the alcázar de colón , having once been the colonial palace of the columbus family – beginning with his son diego – is now a museum displaying period furniture and decorations. the building was originally built in 1510, and restored to its current appearance in 1952. [ citation needed ] a 700 million us dollar investment was made in the port of the ozama river adjacent to the ciudad colonial aiming to turn santo domingo into a port of call for luxury cruise ships and including a privately owned marina. the project is being completed by sans soucí ports s.a. the city proper of santo domingo is subdivided into incorporated areas (neighborhoods) called sectores which could be considered as small urban towns. all sectores are serviced directly by the municipal mayor's office . santo domingo is the center of the national government of the dominican republic. the president's office and ministries, national congress, supreme court of justice, and other main government institutions are located in the metropolitan area. the city is administered by the ayuntamiento del distrito nacional (city hall), which is responsible for municipal functions. [ 37 ] the current mayor of santo domingo is carolina mejía de garrigó. the "policía nacional" (national police) and "policia turística" (tourist police) (politur) are tasked with enforcing city safety. the city is the center of economic activity in the dominican republic. it is where most of the country's wealth is concentrated and the seat of the national legislature, judicial, and executive government. many national and international firms have their headquarters or regional offices in santo domingo. the city attracts many international firms and franchises such as ikea, goldcorp and barrick due to its location and economic stability. [ 38 ] the infrastructure is suitable for most business operations. a key element that has helped the city grow and compete globally is the telecommunications infrastructure. santo domingo and the dominican republic as a whole enjoy a modern and extensive telecommunications system liberalized in the late 1990s which has benefited from extensive foreign investment. this has attracted numerous call centers in recent years. santo domingo not only has an excellent telecommunications infrastructure but also a sizeable bilingual population that speaks english. the city's economic growth can be witnessed in the extensive vertical growth experienced across many of its neighborhoods. the construction boom is reflected in the many high density residential towers, shopping malls, elevated highways, the metro expansion and overall increase in commercial activity. santo domingo has a thriving middle class contrasting with the significant pockets of poverty that remain as challenges for the future. marginalized slum conditions exist mostly in the northeast quadrant of the city with smaller pockets extending across the city. areas of extensive development include the poligono central , which is bordered by the avenida john f. kennedy northward 27 february avenue south, avenida winston churchill to the west and avenida máximo gómez to the east, and is characterized by its mixed development and its very active nightlife. santo domingo has areas of high development, among them serralles, naco, arroyo hondo, piantini, urb fernandez, ens. julieta, paraiso, los prados, bella vista, sarasota and other sectors, where most of the middle class can be found. bella vista and la esperilla are currently the fastest growing sectors with large mega -projects. gazcue belongs to the more traditional southeastern area of the city and is known for its buildings dating from the 1930s to the 1960s. the performing arts are very important in santo domingo. the city has its own symphonic orchestra , chamber orchestra, opera company, ballet company, folkloric company, and national theater , including a number of smaller groups. the plaza of culture is the center of activity, but there are concerts, ballet, folklore, and other performances throughout the city. casa de teatro is the gathering place of avant garde artists, actors, and musicians. it stages art and literature exhibitions and offers painting, drama, and dancing courses and monthly contests for poetry, short stories, and other forms of literature. santo domingo is the location of numerous museums, many of which are located in the zona colonial district. [ 32 ] in the zona colonial is the museum of alcázar , in diego colon's palace, [ 40 ] the museum of the casas reales , with artefacts of the colonial period and a collection of ancient weapons donated by trujillo , [ 41 ] the naval museum of the atarazanas, in the former naval yards, museo de la catedral, museo memorial de la resistencia dominicana , documenting the struggle for freedom during the regimes of trujillo and balaguer , museo duarte , dedicated to the hero of dominican independence, and the world of ambar museum. plaza de la cultura also houses the city's most important cultural venues, including the teatro nacional (national theater) and various museums; the palacio nacional , which houses the presidency of the dominican republic; the palacio de bellas artes (palace of fine arts), a neoclassical building that is the permanent home of the country's national symphony orchestra; and the boulevard 27 de febrero, a pedestrian promenade located on the busy avenida 27 de febrero, which displays works of art from prominent dominican artists and sculptors. another attraction is the centro olímpico juan pablo duarte , a sports complex in the center of santo domingo. this complex was used during the 2003 pan american games . in the plaza de la cultura are the museum of the dominican man, with artifacts from the pre-columbian taíno civilization, the national museum of history and geography, the museum of natural history and the museum of modern art. other museums include the museo bellapart , a prominent private collection of 19th- and 20th-century dominican painting and sculpture and the museo prehispanico, a major private collection of pre-columbian taíno art. [ 42 ] telecommunications in the dominican republic include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the internet. there are 59 television stations in santo domingo. [ 43 ] santo domingo has the greatest number of television signals in the country. additional cable television channels are provided by companies like aster , cable tv dominicana, sky dominicana , and telecable. in santo domingo there are 100 different stations in am frequency and 44 in fm frequency. [ citation needed ] the city has various parks, many of which are relatively large. santo domingo (d.n) is surrounded by the santo domingo greenbelt . mirador norte park lies in the north of the city, close to villa mella and mirador sur park is located in the southwest section of the city. mirador del este is located on the east bank of the ozama river and it is the seat of the columbus lighthouse . independencia park and colón park are located in zona colonial. zoo parque zoológico nacional is home to a range of 82–100 both exotic and native plants and animal species. [ 44 ] there are eighteen universities in santo domingo, the highest number of any city in the dominican republic. established in 1538, the universidad autónoma de santo domingo (uasd) is the oldest university in the americas and is also the only public university in the city. [ 45 ] [ 46 ] santo domingo holds the nation's highest percentage of residents with a higher education degree. [ citation needed ] santo domingo has an underground and elevated rapid transit metro system. it is the most extensive metro in the caribbean and central american region by total length and number of stations. [ 47 ] the santo domingo metro is part of a major "national master plan" to improve transportation in the city as well as the rest of the nation. the first line was planned to relieve traffic congestion in the máximo gómez and hermanas mirabal avenue . the second line, which opened in april 2013, is meant to relieve the congestion along the duarte-kennedy-centenario corridor in the city from west to east. as of august 2013, the metro consists of these two lines. four more lines are planned to be constructed in the near future, for a total of six. before the opening of the second line, 30,856,515 passengers rode the santo domingo metro in 2012. according to government figures more than 300,000 people ride the 31 kilometer system on a daily basis. [ 48 ] in 2018, a 5-kilometer teleférico de santo domingo (aerial cable car) was opened to provide service to the poorest areas in the east and north of the metropolitan area, and serve as a feeder for the metro. the cable car is used by more than 12,000 people daily. [ 49 ] santo domingo is served by two airports. aeropuerto internacional la isabela , an early 21st century-constructed airport located in the northern section of the city, within kilometers of the city center. it served mostly domestic and charter flight but now has several international flights. the major international airport that serves the city is santo domingo las americas , which serves north, central and south america and also europe. the port of santo domingo is located on the ozama river. its location at the center of the caribbean is well suited for flexible itinerary planning and has excellent support, road and airport infrastructure within the santo domingo region, which facilitate access and transfers. the port is suitable for both turnaround and transit calls. the port's renovation is part of a major redevelopment project, aimed at integrating the port area and the zona colonial and foster a cruise, yacht, and high-end tourism destination. supported by legislation approved in 2005, the project, developed by the sans souci group, also includes the development of a new sports marina and a 122-acre (0.49 km 2 ) mixed-leisure real estate development adjacent to the port. santo domingo is the terminus for four of the five national highways . the city is connected to the southwest of the country by the national highway dr-2 (avenida george washington and autopista 30 de mayo), and with the cities of the country's northwest by dr-1 (expreso kennedy, corredor duarte), which serves as a direct link to the city of santiago de los caballeros . dr-3 (expreso 27 de febrero/autopista de las américas) connects santo domingo directly to the east of the country, including the cities of san pedro de macorís , la romana , and major tourist sites such as punta cana and bávaro , and to the samaná province (in the northeast) via the samana highway. in the city, motoconchos (motorcycle taxis), guaguas / voladoras (low quality public buses), and carros públicos / conchos (shared taxis) are common modes of transport. the santo domingo metro is the highest quality in the region of the caribbean and central america. it is composed of 2 lines that cross the city. expreso john f. kennedy : this expressway crosses the national district from east to west in the north-central part. the avenue consists of a total of ten lanes, five on each side. the two center lanes of the road are express lanes to facilitate transit. it also has several bypasses and elevated crossings. avenida 27 de febrero : it is the main avenue to cross the national district from east to west in the central part of santo domingo. it starts at the juan bosch bridge and crosses the entire city until the roundabout at the plaza de la bandera, which extends into the town of santo domingo west and ends on the duarte highway. the thoroughfare is composed of a total of ten lanes. five on each side. the four lanes in the center of the avenue are express that facilitate transit in the city from east to west, with several elevated cross streets, overpasses and tunnels. it also has exclusive bus lanes. avenida simón bolívar : it extends from independence park to the junction with the avenue winston churchill. in its entirety, this avenue is composed of two local lanes one-way east- west. avenida independencia : it extends from the intersection with avenida gregorio luperón to independence park. the avenue consists of a total of four lanes (two eastbound and two westbound ) from crossing with av g. luperon to the intersection of avenida italia . from the junction with av italy until independence park avenue becomes one-way eastbound and contains only two lanes. avenida george washington : it is colloquially referred as "el malecón" this is santo domingo's maritime boulevard, running alongside the caribbean sea's waterfront. it extends from palo hincado street to the intersection with abraham lincoln avenue; from that point to the haina river highway 30 may extends also includes president billini walk, which starts in palo hincado street and joins the avenida del puerto along the western bank of the ozama river. throughout its entire length it is composed of four lanes (two on each side). on this boulevard you will find the most exclusive hotels in the city, several casinos, the mixed business and residential high rise complex malecón center, the obelisk and eugenio maría de hostos ' park. this is also the boulevard where the santo domingo carnival parade takes place. avenida winston churchill : it extends from kennedy avenue to avenida 27 de febrero, from there on, it continues as avenida jimenez moya to reach the centro de los heroes and finally the boardwalk. this thoroughfare is distinguished by its date palms that are planted on the sidewalks . throughout its length the road is composed of six lanes (three on each side) and a large wooded median popularly known as boulevard de la churchill ("churchill's boulevard") and within this lies the boulevard of the stars. avenida abraham lincoln : extends from avenida kennedy to the seawall. the route consists of six lanes (three on each side) and a median suitable for jogging laid with palm trees. it traverses the city's commercial and leisure city center. avenida josé ortega y gasset : it extends from the paseo de los reyes católicos avenue until 27 de febrero. the avenue consists of four lanes, two on each side. along this avenue lies the centro olímpico juan pablo duarte athletic complex and the hospital general de la plaza de la salud medical complex. avenida tiradentes : it extends from the jetty in the south, through the state's university universidad autónoma de santo domingo . it extends to the north along avenida 27 de febrero, john f. kennedy, and continuing north past the city's baseball stadium estadio quisqueya until it reaches the parque zoológico nacional national zoo. avenida gregorio luperón : it extends from kennedy avenue to highway 30 may on the western edge of santo domingo. the thoroughfare consists of eight lanes, four on each side and a landscaped median. local attractions located on this strip includes gallístico center herrera industrial zone, and the plaza de la bandera. avenida máximo gómez y báez : the city's main south–north avenue, it extends from the malecón to the presidente peynado bridge. the boulevard consists of four lanes, two on each side. major buildings and points of interest along this boulevard are: the national cemetery, plaza de la cultura which houses the national theatre and the palace of fine arts. there are also two universities (unapec and utesa), as well as the headquarters of the people's bank and five star hotel "hotel barceló santo domingo". avenida juan pablo duarte : it extends from the intersection of avenida paseo and martyrs of the catholic monarchs to calle padre billini in the colonial zone . the avenue consists of three lanes on a road north–south direction becomes one lane to enter the colonial zone . this avenue is the main commerce route for low-income people throughout the metropolitan area with department stores, restaurants, and shops that offer goods and services at modest prices . in "duarte" (as popularly known) you can find the new market, the enriquillo park, duarte commercial square and santo domingo's chinatown . avenida nicolás de ovando y cáceres : is located on the northern part of santo domingo starting at the roundabout cristo rey sector and corner with ortega y gasset, máximo gómez, arbert duarte and thomas avenues, among others; culminating in the sector of simón bolívar . this avenue is characterized by many businesses that sell auto parts . baseball is the most popular sport in the country, and was introduced by the united states marines . santo domingo is home to two of the six teams in the dominican professional baseball league . these two teams are based in the estadio quisqueya located in ensanche la fe. in 2007 the stadium underwent a rebuilding job which expanded its number of seats and the overall look of the field. the bullpens are now enclosed and out of play. former president leonel fernández also announced in 2009 that there are plans to turn the stadium and the adjacent area into a modern sports complex. santo domingo's basketball tournament superior is held in the national district each year, with several teams participating and representing several sectors and social clubs of the city. some of the teams participating in the tournament include: the city hosted the 2005 fiba americas championship , which was played at the palacio de los deportes virgilio travieso soto . santo domingo has four sister cities designated by sister cities international : [ 57 ]

october 7 hamas-led attack on israel military engagements israeli invasion of the gaza strip military engagements the gaza war [ q ] has been fought between israel and hamas -led palestinian militant groups [ r ] in the gaza strip and israel since 7 october 2023. it is the 15th war of the gaza–israel conflict , [ 82 ] and has sparked an ongoing middle eastern crisis . the first day was the deadliest in israel's history, and the war is the deadliest for palestinians in the history of the israeli–palestinian conflict . [ 83 ] on 7 october 2023, hamas-led militant groups launched a surprise attack on israel , in which 1,195 israelis and foreign nationals, including 815 civilians, were killed, and 251 taken hostage with the stated goal of forcing israel to release palestinian prisoners . [ 84 ] [ 85 ] after clearing militants from its territory, israel launched an intensive bombing campaign [ 86 ] [ 87 ] and invaded gaza on 27 october with the stated objectives of destroying hamas and freeing the hostages. [ 88 ] [ 89 ] israeli forces launched numerous campaigns during the invasion, including the rafah offensive from may 2024, three battles fought around khan yunis , and the siege of north gaza from october 2024. flashpoints during the war attracting global attention include the nova festival massacre , the kidnapping and killing of the bibas family , the al-ahli arab hospital explosion , the flour massacre , the tel al-sultan attack , and the killing of five-year-old hind rajab . a temporary ceasefire in november 2023 broke down, and a second ceasefire in january 2025 ended in march, when israel launched surprise airstrikes across gaza. [ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] since the start of the israeli offensive, over 50,000 palestinians in gaza have been reported as killed , [ s ] over half of them women and children , and more than 110,000 palestinians have been injured. [ 16 ] [ 18 ] [ 11 ] israel has assassinated hamas leaders inside and outside of gaza. their tightened blockade cut off basic necessities, causing a severe hunger crisis with a high risk of famine persisting as of november 2024 [update] . [ 93 ] [ 94 ] by early 2025, israel had caused unprecedented destruction in gaza and made large parts of it uninhabitable, [ 95 ] leveling entire cities [ 96 ] and destroying the healthcare system, agricultural land , [ 97 ] religious and cultural landmarks , [ 98 ] educational facilities , [ 99 ] [ 100 ] and cemeteries . [ 101 ] nearly all of the strip's 2.3 million palestinian population have been forcibly displaced . [ 102 ] [ 103 ] over 100,000 israelis were internally displaced as of february 2024. [ 104 ] torture and sexual violence were committed by palestinian militant groups and israeli forces. [ 105 ] various experts and human rights organizations have stated that israel and hamas have committed war crimes , and that israel has committed genocide in gaza . [ 106 ] a case accusing israel of committing genocide is being reviewed by the international court of justice , while the international criminal court reviewed and issued arrest warrants for benjamin netanyahu , yoav gallant and mohammed deif , though deif's warrant was withdrawn when he was killed. [ 107 ] israel received extensive military and diplomatic support from the united states , which has vetoed multiple pro-ceasefire resolutions from the un security council . [ 108 ] the war has reverberated regionally, with axis of resistance groups across several arab countries and iran clashing with the united states and israel. by late 2024, a year of strikes between israel and hezbollah led to a brief israeli invasion of lebanon , as well as the fall of the assad regime and an ongoing israeli invasion of syria . the war continues to have significant regional and international repercussions, with large protests worldwide calling for a ceasefire, as well as a surge of antisemitism and anti-palestinianism . the gaza war is referred to by different names. israel calls it the "iron swords war" ( hebrew : מלחמת חרבות ברזל ). [ 109 ] [ t ] it has also been referred to as the "simchat torah war", as the war started on the jewish holiday of simchat torah , reminiscent of the yom kippur war . [ 112 ] palestinian militant groups refer to it as the "battle of al-aqsa flood" ( arabic : معركة طوفان الأقصى ), in reference to operation al-aqsa flood . [ 113 ] [ 114 ] western media outlets have variably described it as the "israel–hamas war" [ 115 ] or the "israel–gaza war", [ 116 ] [ failed verification ] while others use "war on gaza". [ 117 ] others have used the term "october 7 war". [ 118 ] [ 119 ] some have rejected "war" as an appropriate framework and call it the " gaza genocide ", [ 120 ] [ 95 ] "second nakba ", [ 121 ] or "nakba 2023". [ 122 ] [ 123 ] the 1948 palestine war saw the establishment of israel over most of what had been mandatory palestine , with the exception of two separated territories that became known as the west bank and the gaza strip , which were held by jordan and egypt respectively. following the 1967 six-day war , israel occupied the palestinian territories of the west bank and the gaza strip. [ 125 ] the upcoming period witnessed two popular uprisings by palestinians against the israeli occupation ; the first and second intifadas in 1987 and 2000 respectively, [ 126 ] with the latter's end seeing israel's unilateral withdrawal from gaza in 2005. [ 127 ] [ 128 ] since 2007, the gaza strip has been governed by hamas , an islamist militant group, while the west bank remained under the control of the fatah -led palestinian authority . after hamas's takeover, israel imposed a blockade of the gaza strip , [ 129 ] [ 130 ] that significantly damaged its economy . [ 131 ] the blockade was justified by israel citing security concerns, [ 132 ] but international rights groups have characterized the blockade as a form of collective punishment . [ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] due to the israeli blockade of the gaza strip , unrwa reported that 81% of people were living below the poverty level in 2023, with 63% being food insecure and dependent on international assistance. [ 124 ] [ 136 ] since 2007, israel and hamas, along with other palestinian militant groups based in gaza, have engaged in conflict, [ 132 ] [ 130 ] [ 137 ] including in four wars: in 2008–2009 , 2012 , 2014 , and 2021 . [ 138 ] [ 139 ] these conflicts killed approximately 6,400 palestinians and 300 israelis . [ 140 ] [ 54 ] [ 124 ] in 2018–2019, there were large weekly organized protests near the gaza-israel border , which were violently suppressed by israel, whose forces killed hundreds and injured thousands of palestinians by sniper fire. [ 141 ] [ 142 ] soon after the 2021 israel–palestine crisis began, hamas's military wing, the al-qassam brigades , started planning the 7 october 2023 operation against israel. [ 143 ] [ 144 ] according to diplomats, hamas had repeatedly said in the months leading up to october 2023 that it did not want another military escalation in gaza as it would worsen the humanitarian crisis that occurred after the 2021 conflict. [ 135 ] hamas officials stated that the attack was a response to the israeli occupation , blockade of the gaza strip , israeli settler violence against palestinians, restrictions on the movement of palestinians , and imprisonment of thousands of palestinians , whom hamas sought to release by taking israeli hostages. [ 145 ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] numerous commentators have identified the broader context of israeli occupation as a cause of the war. [ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] the associated press wrote that palestinians are "in despair over a never-ending occupation in the west bank and suffocating blockade of gaza". [ 151 ] several human rights organizations, including amnesty international , [ 152 ] b'tselem [ 153 ] and human rights watch [ 154 ] have likened the israeli occupation to apartheid , although supporters of israel dispute this characterization. [ 155 ] [ 156 ] however, an advisory opinion by the international court of justice published in july 2024 affirmed the occupation as being illegal and said it violated article 3 of the international convention on the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination , which prohibits racial segregation and apartheid. [ 157 ] the netanyahu government has been criticized within israel for granting work permits to gazan residents , facilitating the transfer of funds to hamas and pursuing relative calm. these actions have been criticized as having backfired in light of the attacks on 7 october 2023. [ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] us president joe biden has said the aim of the 7 october attacks was to disrupt the saudi–israel normalization talks . [ 161 ] in the morning of 7 october 2023, [ 162 ] during the jewish holidays of simchat torah and shemini atzeret on shabbat , [ 163 ] hamas announced the start of what it called " operation al-aqsa flood ", firing between 3,000 and 5,000 rockets from the gaza strip into israel within a span of 20 minutes, killing at least five people. [ 164 ] [ 165 ] [ 166 ] in the evening, hamas launched another barrage of 150 rockets towards israel. [ 165 ] simultaneously, around 3,000 hamas militants [ 43 ] infiltrated israel from gaza using trucks, motorcycles, bulldozers, speedboats, and paragliders. [ 151 ] [ 162 ] [ 167 ] they took over checkpoints at kerem shalom and erez , and created openings in the border fence in five other places. [ 168 ] militants massacred civilians in several kibbutzim , [ 169 ] [ 170 ] where they took hostages [ 171 ] and set fire to homes. [ 172 ] in one massacre at an outdoor music festival near re'im , at least 325 people were killed, with more injured or taken hostage. [ 173 ] [ 174 ] in total, 251 people, mostly civilians, were taken hostage , including [ 175 ] [ 176 ] children, elderly people, and soldiers. [ 177 ] hamas militants also reportedly engaged in mutilation, torture, and sexual and gender-based violence . [ 178 ] [ 179 ] [ 180 ] the 7 october attack was described as "an intelligence failure for the ages" [ 181 ] and a " failure of imagination " on the part of the israeli government. [ 182 ] a bbc report commented on hamas's "extraordinary levels of operational security". [ 183 ] it later emerged that abnormal hamas movements had been detected the previous day by israeli intelligence, but the military's alert level was not raised and political leaders were not informed. [ 184 ] a briefing in the economist noted that "the assault dwarf[ed] all other mass murders of israeli civilians", and that "the last time before october 7th that this many jews were murdered on a single day was during the holocaust ." [ 170 ] hamas stated that its attack was a response to the blockade of the gaza strip, the expansion of illegal israeli settlements , rising israeli settler violence and recent escalations at al-aqsa . [ 145 ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] according to both hamas officials and external observers, the attack was a calculated effort to create a "permanent" state of war and revive interest in the palestinian cause. [ 185 ] [ 186 ] the idf began israel's counter-attack several hours after the hamas-led invasion. [ 187 ] the first helicopters sent to support the military arrived at the gaza strip an hour after fighting began. [ 173 ] they encountered difficulties in determining which places were occupied, and distinguishing between civilians, idf soldiers, and palestinian militants on the ground. [ 173 ] a june 2024 un report [ 188 ] [ 189 ] and a july 2024 haaretz investigation revealed that the idf ordered the hannibal directive to be used, killing many israeli civilians and soldiers. [ 190 ] [ 191 ] an abc news (australia) investigation reported that at least 13 civilians were killed in a 'hannibal' incident in beeri . at 6:40 p.m., anticipating that militants would flee back to gaza, the israeli army launched artillery strikes targeting the border fence area. the idf said it was not aware of any civilians being hurt in these bombardments, [ 190 ] but eyewitness accounts and testimony contradicted the idf's official review, which exonerated itself. [ 190 ] [ 192 ] the attack was a complete surprise to the israelis. [ 193 ] in a televised broadcast, benjamin netanyahu , prime minister of israel , announced that the country was at war. [ 167 ] he threatened to "turn all the places where hamas is organized and hiding into cities of ruins", called gaza "the city of evil", and urged its residents to leave. [ 194 ] [ 145 ] overnight, israel's security cabinet voted to act to bring about the "destruction of the military and governmental capabilities of hamas and palestinian islamic jihad ". [ 195 ] the israel electric corporation , which supplies 80% of the gaza strip's electricity, cut off power to the area. [ 196 ] this reduced gaza's power supply from 120 mw to 20 mw, provided by power plants paid for by the palestinian authority. [ 197 ] the idf declared a "state of readiness for war", [ 165 ] mobilized tens of thousands of army reservists , [ 162 ] [ 196 ] and declared a state of emergency for areas within 80 kilometers (50 mi) of gaza. [ 198 ] the yamam counterterrorism unit was deployed, [ 199 ] along with four new divisions, augmenting 31 existing battalions. [ 151 ] reservists were reported deployed in gaza, in the west bank, and along borders with lebanon and syria. [ 200 ] residents near gaza were asked to stay inside, while civilians in southern and central israel were "required to stay next to shelters". [ 196 ] the southern region of israel was closed to civilian movement, [ 199 ] and roads were closed around gaza [ 151 ] and tel aviv. [ 196 ] while ben gurion airport and ramon airport remained operational, multiple airlines cancelled flights to and from israel. [ 201 ] on 9 or 10 october, hamas offered to release all civilian hostages held in gaza if israel would call off its planned invasion of the gaza strip, but the israeli government rejected the offer. [ 202 ] following the surprise attack, the israeli air force conducted airstrikes that they said targeted hamas targets, [ 165 ] [ 198 ] [ 203 ] employing its artificial intelligence habsora ("the gospel") software. [ 204 ] [ 205 ] these airstrikes were killing, on average, 350 persons per day during the first twenty days, totaling over 7,000 deaths during that time. [ 206 ] israel also rescued two hostages before declaring a state of war for the first time since the 1973 yom kippur war . [ 207 ] [ 208 ] on 9 october, defense minister gallant announced a "complete siege" of the gaza strip, cutting off electricity and blocking the entry of food and fuel. [ 209 ] this order drew criticism from human rights watch (hrw) who described it as "abhorrent" and as a "call to commit a war crime". [ 210 ] [ 211 ] gallant backed down under pressure from us president joe biden , and a deal was struck ten days later to allow aid into gaza. [ 212 ] the first such aid convoy entered gaza on 21 october, [ 213 ] while fuel did not arrive until november. [ 214 ] on 13 october, the idf ordered all civilians in gaza city to evacuate to areas south of the wadi gaza [ 215 ] within 24 hours. the hamas authority for refugee affairs responded by telling residents in northern gaza to defy those orders. [ 216 ] the israeli order was widely condemned as "outrageous" and "impossible", and calls were made for it to be reversed. [ 217 ] as a part of the order, the idf outlined a six-hour window on 13 october for refugees to flee south along specified routes. [ 218 ] an explosion along one of the safe routes killed 70 palestinians. israel and hamas blamed each other for the attack. [ 219 ] the idf said hamas set up roadblocks to keep gaza residents from evacuating. [ 220 ] israeli officials, foreign governments and intergovernmental organizations condemned hamas's alleged use of hospitals and civilians as human shields , which have been contested by amnesty international [ 221 ] and by hamas themselves. [ 222 ] [ 223 ] on 17 october, israel bombed areas of southern gaza. [ 224 ] late in the evening, an explosion occurred in the parking lot of the al-ahli arabi baptist hospital in the center of gaza city, killing hundreds. the ongoing conflict prevented independent on-site analysis. [ 225 ] palestinian statements that it was an israeli airstrike were denied by the idf, which stated that the explosion resulted from a failed rocket launch by palestinian islamic jihad , [ 226 ] who denied any involvement. [ 227 ] on 27 october, after building up an invasion force of over 100,000 soldiers, the idf launched a large-scale ground incursion into parts of northern gaza. [ 228 ] [ 229 ] israeli airstrikes targeted the area around al-quds hospital , [ 230 ] where around 14,000 civilians were believed to be sheltering. [ 230 ] the following day, the idf struck jabalia refugee camp , killing 50 and wounding 150 palestinians. israel said the attack killed a senior hamas commander, whose presence hamas denied, and dozens of militants. [ 231 ] [ 232 ] [ 233 ] the attack resulted in several ambassador recalls. [ 234 ] [ 235 ] [ 236 ] on 31 october, israel bombed a six-story apartment building in central gaza, killing at least 106 civilians including 54 children in what human rights watch called an "apparent war crime". [ 237 ] on 1 november, the first group of evacuees left gaza for egypt. five hundred evacuees, comprising critically wounded and foreign nationals, were evacuated over several days. [ 238 ] on 18 november, israel struck a marked médecins sans frontières convoy, killing two aid workers. [ 239 ] on 22 november, israel and hamas reached a temporary ceasefire agreement , providing for a four-day pause [ 240 ] in hostilities to allow for the release of 50 hostages held in gaza. [ 240 ] [ 241 ] the deal also provided for the release of approximately 150 palestinian women and children incarcerated by israel. [ 241 ] israel adopted a grid system to order precise evacuations within gaza. it was criticized as inaccessible, due to the lack of electricity and internet connectivity in gaza, and confusing. some evacuation instructions were vague or contradictory, [ 242 ] [ 243 ] and israel sometimes struck areas it had told people to evacuate to. [ 244 ] [ 245 ] [ 246 ] law experts called these warnings ineffective. [ 247 ] amnesty international found no evidence of hamas targets at the sites of some strikes, and requested that they be investigated as possible war crimes. [ 248 ] on 6 december, refaat alareer , a prominent professor and writer in gaza, was killed by an israeli airstrike. [ 249 ] his poem "if i must die" was widely circulated after his death. [ 250 ] in december, the idf reported its troops had reached the centers of khan yunis , jabalia , and shuja'iyya . [ 251 ] intensified bombing pushed palestinian civilians south to rafah. [ 252 ] between 7 and 10 december, israel detained more than 150 men ; according to israel, they surrendered en masse , [ 253 ] [ 254 ] but this account was disputed by several publications. [ 255 ] [ 256 ] [ 257 ] on 15 december, the idf killed three israeli hostages in a friendly fire incident , after mistakenly identifying them as enemies. [ 258 ] [ 259 ] [ 260 ] the same day, pope francis condemned the killing of two women sheltering at a convent as "terrorism." [ 239 ] on 1 january 2024, israel withdrew from neighborhoods in north gaza. [ 261 ] on 15 january, israeli defense minister yoav gallant said the most intense fighting in the north of the gaza strip had ended, and a new phase of low-intensity fighting was about to begin. [ 262 ] by 18 january, the idf, who had previously stated that hamas control over north gaza was "dismantled", reported that hamas had significantly rebuilt its fighting strength in north gaza. [ 263 ] on 22 january 24 idf soldiers died in the deadliest day for the idf since the invasion began. of these, 21 died when palestinian militants fired an rpg at a tank, causing adjacent buildings to collapse. [ 264 ] [ 265 ] [ 266 ] on 29 january, israeli forces killed hind rajab , a five-year-old girl, and six of her family members when the car they were driving was struck by an israeli tank and machine gun fire; two rescue workers who attempted to retrieve rajab were also killed. [ 267 ] the red crescent released the audio from rajab's phone call with rescue workers, causing international outrage over her death. [ 268 ] between february and may 2024, preparations to invade rafah became a dominant theme in israeli officials' public rhetoric. on 12 february, israel started a bombing campaign on rafah . [ 269 ] food supplies became an increasing issue. on 5 february, israeli gunboats shelled a clearly marked unrwa convoy, forcing unrwa to suspend its operations for almost 3 weeks, affecting 200,000 people. [ 239 ] on 29 february, israeli forces opened fire on palestinians waiting for food aid southwest of gaza city, killing 100 and wounding 750. some of the victims were run over by trucks as panic spread. [ 270 ] survivors described it as an intentional ambush by israeli forces. [ 271 ] [ 272 ] on 1 march, the united states announced it would begin an operation to airdrop food aid into gaza. [ 273 ] some experts called the initiative performative, saying it would not alleviate the food situation. [ 274 ] during his state of the union address , biden announced that a temporary port on gaza's coast would be constructed to enable aid delivery. [ 275 ] al-shifa hospital , previously besieged in november 2023 , was raided again between 18 march and 1 april. [ 276 ] israeli forces killed faiq al-mabhouh, who they said was head of the operations directorate of hamas's internal security service. hamas said al-mabhouh was in charge of civil law enforcement and had been coordinating aid deliveries to north gaza. [ 277 ] [ 278 ] the idf said it killed 200 people in the hospital fighting, including senior hamas leaders; this account was disputed. [ 279 ] [ 280 ] survivors denied that militants had organised on the hospital grounds. [ 281 ] israeli forces were accused of reducing the hospital to a "blown out, fire-blackened" state, and of massacring 400 palestinians. [ 282 ] [ 283 ] [ 284 ] a 25 march un security council resolution calling for an immediate ceasefire in gaza for ramadan [ 285 ] was ignored by the idf. [ 286 ] on 1 april, seven international aid workers from world central kitchen (wck) were killed in an israeli airstrike south of deir al-balah . [ 287 ] [ 288 ] [ 289 ] wck, who said their vehicles were clearly marked and their location known to israel, subsequently withdrew from operating in gaza alongside anera and project hope . [ 288 ] [ 290 ] on 4 april, israel opened the erez crossing for the first time since 7 october after us pressure. [ 291 ] by 6 march, israel had completed a new east–west road in gaza. it was intended to mobilize troops and supplies, to connect and defend idf positions on al-rashid and salah al-din streets, and prevent people in the south of gaza from returning to the north. [ 292 ] on 7 april, israel withdrew from the south gaza strip, with only one brigade remaining in the netzarim corridor in the north. [ 293 ] palestinians displaced from that city began to return from the south of the gaza strip. [ 294 ] israel planned to initiate its ground offensive in rafah around mid-april, but postponed to consider its response to the iranian strikes on israel . [ 295 ] on 25 april, israel intensified strikes on rafah ahead of its threatened invasion. [ 296 ] [ 297 ] on 6 may, the idf ordered 100,000 civilians in eastern rafah to evacuate to al-mawasi , west of khan yunis. [ 298 ] later that day, hamas announced that it had accepted the terms of a ceasefire brokered by egypt and qatar. [ 299 ] the deal included a 6-week ceasefire and exchange of prisoners. [ 300 ] however, israel rejected this deal. [ 301 ] israel said that it found the terms unacceptable, but that it would continue to negotiate while the military operation on rafah was ongoing to "exert military pressure on hamas". [ 302 ] [ 303 ] on 31 may, the united states announced a ceasefire framework for ending the war. [ 304 ] the same day, the idf entered the outskirts of rafah, [ 305 ] [ 306 ] [ 307 ] seizing control of the gaza side of the rafah crossing to egypt the following day. [ 308 ] [ 309 ] on 11 may, the idf ordered more residents to evacuate eastern and central rafah. [ 310 ] by 15 may, an estimated 600,000 had fled rafah and another 100,000 from the north, according to the united nations. [ 311 ] on 24 may, the united nations said only 906 aid truckloads had reached gaza since israel's rafah operation began. [ 312 ] israel bombed the tel al-sultan displacement camp in rafah on 26 may, killing at least 45 people, allegedly including two senior hamas officials. [ 313 ] [ 314 ] [ 315 ] this provoked a skirmish between egyptian and israeli soldiers at the gaza border in which one egyptian soldier was killed. [ 316 ] less than 48 hours afterwards, another evacuation zone, the al-mawasi refugee camp, was bombed , killing at least 21 people. [ 313 ] [ 317 ] [ 318 ] the idf denied involvement in the attack. [ 319 ] on 6 june, israel bombed a school in the nuseirat refugee camp , killing dozens. two days later, israel conducted an attack on nuseirat refugee camp which resulted in the rescue of four hostages [ 320 ] [ 321 ] and the deaths of 274 palestinians. [ 322 ] on 27 june, israeli forces re-invaded the al-shuja'iyya neighborhood . [ 323 ] according to middle east monitor and reliefweb , between 4 july and 10 august, israel attacked 21 schools in gaza, killing 274 people. [ 324 ] [ 325 ] on 22 july, the idf began a brief second invasion of khan yunis . [ 326 ] [ 327 ] israel ordered the evacuation of the eastern part of khan yunis; [ 328 ] 73 people were killed during the first day of the attack. [ 327 ] [ 329 ] [ 330 ] footage from an israeli drone surfaced showing the destruction of the grand mosque in khan yunis. [ 331 ] a third, month-long battle ended on 30 august when the idf withdrew its 98th battalion from khan yunis and deir el-balah, stating it killed over 250 palestinian militants. [ 332 ] on 13 july, at least 90 people were killed and 300 were injured in an israeli strike on al-mawasi and 22 people were killed in an israeli strike targeting people gathered to pray in the al-shati refugee camp . [ 335 ] [ 336 ] [ 337 ] on 10 august, at least 80 palestinians were killed in israeli airstrikes on al-tabaeen school . [ 338 ] the idf claimed to have killed 200 militants and discovered dozens of weapons in tel al-sultan in one week in its operation in rafah . [ 339 ] on 10 september, israeli missile strikes on a tent encampment in al-mawasi killed 19 to 40 people. [ 340 ] [ 341 ] [ 342 ] an iaf uh-60 black hawk helicopter crashed in rafah while trying to evacuate a critically injured combat engineer , killing two israeli soldiers and injuring seven others. [ 343 ] an israeli airstrike on nuseirat refugee camp on 11 september killed at least 18 people. [ 344 ] [ 345 ] [ 346 ] in october, israeli airstrikes on shuhada al-aqsa mosque in deir el-balah and a school in central gaza killed at least 26 palestinians and injured over 93. [ 347 ] [ 348 ] [ 349 ] an israeli strike on rufaida school which was serving as a shelter for displaced people in deir el-balah killed at least 28 people and injured 54 others. [ 350 ] [ 351 ] [ 352 ] oxfam condemned the killing of four engineers working with one of its partners by an israeli airstrike, despite prior coordination of their activities with israeli authorities. [ 353 ] on 8 october, the idf began to encircle jabalia camp , killing several palestinian militants and civilians in air strikes and street battles. [ 354 ] [ 355 ] on 10 october, the idf issued evacuation orders for three hospitals in northern gaza. [ 354 ] the idf's air and ground operations in jabalia continued for the rest of october. [ 356 ] during that month and november, strikes on jabalia killed hundreds of people. [ 357 ] on 10 december, the idf said that it killed 10 hamas operatives who were involved in the killing of three israeli soldiers one day prior. [ 358 ] on 30 december, the idf said that it killed dozens of militants in jabalia. [ 359 ] the idf has been accused of blocking aid delivery to the gaza strip by allowing looting gangs to target aid convoys. [ 360 ] on 16 november 98 out of 109 food trucks carrying un aid from kerem shalom crossing were looted in israeli-controlled areas of the gaza strip . [ 360 ] [ 361 ] [ 362 ] on 1 december, the un suspended its aid shipments to gaza through the kerem shalom crossing, blaming israel for failing to "ensure safe conditions for delivering relief supplies." [ 363 ] on 12 december, two israeli strikes on an aid convoy in southern gaza killed 13 people and wounded at least 30 people, including several of them seriously. [ 364 ] [ 365 ] [ 366 ] on 30 november, a strike on a world central kitchen vehicle transporting supplies killed three aid workers. [ 367 ] [ 368 ] [ 369 ] an israeli airstrike on a group of palestinians waiting for receiving food from an aid convoy in khan yunis killed at least 12 palestinians and injured several others. [ 370 ] on 9 december, an israeli strike hit people who lined up for buying flour in rafah , killing 10 people. [ 371 ] on 16 october, idf ground forces killed yahya sinwar in a shootout in tal as-sultan . [ 372 ] the conscript soldiers who participated in the shootout were initially unaware of sinwar's presence, and he was identified the following day by his dental records. [ 373 ] there were no hostages in sinwar's vicinity at the time of his death, [ 374 ] and no civilian casualties were reported. [ 375 ] biden urged israel to end the war after sinwar's death. [ 376 ] on 13 october, senior idf officials told haaretz that the government was not seeking to revive hostage talks and that political leadership was pushing for the annexation of parts of the gaza strip. [ 377 ] in the later weeks of october, israel's siege of north gaza intensified and daily aid shipments dropped significantly. eyewitnesses reported the shelling of hospitals, razing of shelters, and abductions of men and boys by the israeli military, leading to speculation that israel had decided to implement a plan by a group of retired generals to turn the northern strip into a closed military zone and declare all who refuse to leave as combatants. [ 378 ] on 5 november, israeli brigadier general itzik cohen told reporters that "there is no intention of allowing the residents of the northern gaza strip to return" and that no food aid had entered northern gaza because there were "no more civilians left". [ 379 ] the idf continued its encirclement of jabalia by sending tanks to beit lahia and beit hanoun and issuing evacuation orders to residents. [ 380 ] on 24 october, an idf attack destroyed at least 10 residential buildings in the jabalia refugee camp. according to an assessment by gaza civil defense, 150 people were killed or injured. [ 381 ] on 25 october, the who said it had lost contact with kamal adwan hospital, and un human rights chief volker türk called recent developments in north gaza the "darkest moment" in the war so far. [ 382 ] food aid to gaza reached a new low in october at an average of 30 trucks per day, or less than 6% of the daily pre-war average. [ 383 ] residents of northern gaza said in november that no aid had reached their cities since 5 october. [ 379 ] the un warned that the situation had become "apocalyptic" and that "the entire palestinian population in north gaza is at imminent risk of dying from disease, famine and violence". [ 384 ] on 2 november, unicef said that over 50 children were killed in israeli strikes in jabalia in the past two days. [ 385 ] on 12 november, aid in gaza fell to its lowest level in 11 months despite a us ultimatum that it be restored. [ 386 ] on 24 november, israel issued a new wave of evacuation orders, triggering another round of displacements in jabalia. [ 387 ] unrwa said that israel had rejected nine attempts to deliver aid to north gaza in the month of november and obstructed an additional 82 attempts; they added that the survival conditions were diminishing for the 60,000 to 70,000 civilians remaining in north gaza. [ 388 ] mahmoud almadhoun, a chef who founded the gaza soup kitchen , was targeted and killed by an israeli quadcopter near kamal adwan hospital. [ 389 ] on 5 december, israeli army radio announced that 18,000 palestinians were evacuated from beit lahia and that soldiers killed approximately 20 militants during fighting on the previous day. [ 390 ] on 13 december, israeli tank fire killed dr. sayeed joudeh, the last orthopedic surgeon in northern gaza. [ 391 ] on 26 december, an israeli air strike hit a building in the vicinity of kamal adwan hospital, killing about 50 people, including five staff. [ 392 ] over the next days, the world health organization announced that the hospital had been put out of service by israeli attacks and the hospital's director, hussam abu safiya, had been abducted: the idf forced patients to evacuate to an already-destroyed hospital by cutting off their oxygen. [ 393 ] the idf claimed to have killed 19 militants during its raid; [ 394 ] [ 395 ] gaza health ministry said that 50 people including hospital staff were killed. [ 394 ] on 18 march, israel launched attacks across gaza, killing over 400 and ending the ceasefire. [ 92 ] [ 396 ] [ 397 ] [ 398 ] israel stated the attack was due to the refusal of hamas to extend the first phase of the ceasefire by releasing more hostages, and was also in response to hamas's rearming and reorganizing over the course of the two months of ceasefire. [ 399 ] hamas said that it had adhered to the ceasefire agreement, implementing it precisely, and that israel had resumed aggression and war. internationally, the strikes were seen to stymie hopes for a lasting ceasefire. [ 400 ] observers have noted that israel chose to launch the attack on the day netanyahu would testify in his corruption trial , forcing the legal proceedings to be postponed. [ 401 ] multiple senior members of gaza's government and the hamas political bureau were killed during this round of fighting, including issam al-da'alis , whose position is akin to the prime minister of gaza , salah al-bardawil [ 402 ] and ismail barhoum (members of the political bureau), [ 403 ] [ 404 ] [ 405 ] mahmoud abu watfa (undersecretary of the interior ministry of the gaza strip ) and bahjat abu sultan (chief of internal security). palestinian islamic jihad spokesman abu hamza was also killed in the airstrikes. [ 406 ] [ 407 ] the popular resistance committees announced the death of muhammad al-batran, commander of its artillery unit and a member of its central military brigade council. [ 408 ] on 19 march, the idf said that it had launched "targeted ground activities" in the gaza strip to create a "partial buffer" in the territory, partially recapturing the center of the netzarim corridor . [ 409 ] [ 410 ] two days later, the idf destroyed the turkish-palestinian friendship hospital via controlled demolition. [ 411 ] on 23 march, idf troops fired on several humanitarian vehicles , including five ambulances, a fire truck, and a united nations vehicle, in al-hashashin area in southern rafah, killing 15 palestinian medics. it was not until 30 march that their bodies were discovered in a mass grave. [ 412 ] [ 413 ] on 25 march, amid the israeli operation, [ 400 ] hundreds [ 414 ] to thousands [ 415 ] of palestinians in gaza rose up in protest against hamas and the continued war, demanding an end to the war and an end to hamas's rule over the gaza strip . the protests were caused by war-weariness and dissatisfaction with hamas, specifically their alleged misuse of humanitarian aid intended for gazans, [ 416 ] suppression of the freedom of speech and of the press , and abuse of palestinian civilians. [ 417 ] on 27 march, an israeli airstrike on a tent in jabalia killed hamas spokesman abdel-latif al-qanoua. [ 418 ] the same day, a world central kitchen volunteer was killed in an israeli strike on a wck supported community kitchen as meals were being served. [ 419 ] on 9 april, israeli warplanes bombed a multi-story residential building in shuja'iyya , killing over 35 palestinians and wounding at least another 70. [ 420 ] [ 421 ] on 12 april, the idf announced that it had encircled rafah, and planned to seize portions of it while ordering large-scale evacuations of its population. [ 422 ] on 13 april, two israeli missiles hit al-ahli arab hospital, forcing patients to evacuate and destroying its emergency department. [ 423 ] on 23 april, israel bombed a school in gaza city sheltering displaced families, killing at least 10. [ 424 ] following the introduction of a qatari-brokered truce on 24 november 2023, active fighting in the gaza strip ceased. hamas exchanged some hostages for the release of palestinian prisoners held by israel. [ 425 ] israel arrested almost as many palestinians as it released during the truce. [ 426 ] this occurred until 28 november, when both israel and hamas accused each other of violating the truce. [ 427 ] [ 428 ] on 30 november, in a "last-minute agreement", hamas released eight hostages in exchange for the release of 30 imprisoned palestinians and a one-day truce extension. [ 429 ] the truce expired on 1 december, as israel and hamas blamed each other for failing to agree on an extension. [ 430 ] on 15 january 2025, an agreement was announced between israel and hamas, through the mediation of qatar, in which hamas agreed to release a number of israeli hostages held in the gaza strip since the 7 october attack in exchange for hamas militants and other palestinian prisoners held in israeli prisons. the two parties also agreed to a ceasefire for the second time during the war; [ 431 ] it went into effect on the morning of 19 january 2025. [ 432 ] on 27 january, tens of thousands of palestinians began a mass return to northern gaza after israel opened a corridor for civilian movement following a 48-hour delay. [ 433 ] hamas claimed that israel had violated the terms of the ceasefire, and announced the suspension of the release of israeli hostages on 10 february. [ 434 ] after netanyahu and trump threatened to restart fighting in gaza, [ 435 ] hamas relented on 13 february, [ 436 ] allowing the release of hostages to begin again two days later. [ 437 ] on 22 february, hamas released six israeli hostages; [ 438 ] however, israel refused to release the 600 palestinian prisoners, with netanyahu objecting to the "use of hostages for propaganda" and saying that israel would release the prisoners once the next hostage release was guaranteed without the ceremonies. [ 439 ] on 25 february, israel and hamas reached a deal to exchange the bodies of israeli hostages who were agreed to be handed over during the first phase for releasing hundreds of palestinian prisoners without public ceremony. [ 440 ] on 1 march, the day the first phase of the ceasefire was scheduled to end, hamas rejected an israeli proposal to extend it to release more hostages, demanding the implementation of the second phase. [ 441 ] negotiations for implementing the second phase of the ceasefire agreement, intended to see the release of all remaining living hostages, the withdrawal of the israeli military from gaza and a permanent end to the war, were supposed to have begun in february, sixteen days after the initial ceasefire began, but never happened. [ 442 ] [ 443 ] netanyahu's office said that israel endorsed a us plan to extend the gaza truce for the ramadan and passover periods. under this plan, half of the living and dead hostages would be released on the first day of the extended truce and the remaining hostages would be released at the end of the period if a permanent truce was reached. it claimed that the initial deal allowed israel to resume war at any moment after 1 march if negotiations were deemed ineffective. following hamas's refusal to accept the us proposal, [ 444 ] [ 445 ] netanyahu ceased the entry of aid to gaza the next day. [ 446 ] [ 447 ] the humanitarian aid blockade was condemned by mediators, namely egypt, as a violation of the ceasefire, which stipulated that phase one would automatically be extended as long as phase two negotiations were in progress. [ 448 ] [ 449 ] on 9 march, israeli energy minister eli cohen ordered a halt to supply of israeli electricity to gaza. [ 450 ] on 14 march, hamas said that it agreed to a proposal from mediators to release israeli-american hostage edan alexander and the bodies of four dual-national hostages. [ 451 ] [ 452 ] the u.s. and israel rejected the offer, which did not conform to their joint proposal calling for the release of five living hostages on the first day of an extended ceasefire. [ 453 ] [ 454 ] on 18 march, israel launched surprise airstrikes on gaza as israeli defense minister israel katz declared that israel has "returned to fighting in gaza". [ 455 ] in february 2025, the leader of the israeli opposition, yair lapid , proposed that gaza be returned to egypt for up to 15 years in exchange for the cancellation of its external debt. egypt rejected the proposal stating it undermined the palestinian cause. [ 456 ] on 2 april, israel katz announced the israeli government's intention to "seize large areas" of gaza as large air and ground operations resumed following the end of the march ceasefire. [ 457 ] on 17 april, katz said that israeli forces would remain in areas of gaza, lebanon and syria indefinitely. [ 458 ] after the announcement of a second ceasefire in january 2025, donald trump announced his intention to displace the palestinian population of gaza , reiterating his position that they should be resettled in neighboring arab countries three more times that month. [ 459 ] ahead of a 4 february meeting with netanyahu, trump specified his intention to permanently displace gaza's palestinian inhabitants, which would be in violation of international law. he proposed a us takeover of gaza that evening during a press conference with netanyahu. [ 460 ] trump insisted that neighboring countries would pay for gaza's reconstruction and that "world people" would live there. he did not rule out deploying us troops if necessary. on 5 and 6 february, trump aides and trump himself walked back some of his comments, including his willingness to deploy us soldiers. on 10 february, trump said that palestinians who leave gaza would have no right of return . in a meeting with king abdullah ii of jordan , trump said that the us would take rather than buy gaza because "it's a war torn area. it's gaza. there is nothing to buy." [ 461 ] trump had proposed jordan take in the displaced palestinians from gaza, which jordanian foreign minister ayman safadi categorically rejected, stating "they don't want to come to jordan and we don't want them to come to jordan." [ 462 ] these statements were met with condemnation from world leaders; however, in israel, far-right national security minister itamar ben-gvir praised trump, saying that palestinian "migration" was the only solution to the war. [ 463 ] netanyahu and ben-gvir characterized the planned displacement of gazans as a "voluntary migration", but communications minister shlomo karhi said the transfer will be forced rather than voluntary. [ 464 ] trump has rejected the arab league plan claiming that "the current proposal does not address the reality that gaza is currently uninhabitable and residents cannot humanely live in a territory covered in debris and unexploded ordnance," and that the trump administration will go ahead with seizing the territory "to bring peace and prosperity to the region". [ 465 ] arab governments rejected trump's transfer plan, instead backing an egyptian proposal. the arab league , meeting on 4 march in cairo, devised a $53bn plan detailing the reconstruction of gaza while keeping its population in place. [ 466 ] the proposal also included the demand that hamas disarm, step down and fresh elections to a reformed palestinian authority be held. [ 465 ] algerian president abdelmadjid tebboune boycotted the league meeting claiming that it was "monopolized by a limited and narrow group of arab countries" namely the arab states of the persian gulf . [ 465 ] hamas also reiterated that the group's arms were non-negotiable and rejected the plan. [ 465 ] in march 2025, the united states and israel claimed to have contacted officials from egypt , jordan , sudan , somalia and somaliland to discuss the resettlement of gaza residents in their territories. [ 467 ] egypt, [ 468 ] jordan, [ 462 ] and sudan, [ 469 ] rejected the proposal while somalia and somaliland denied that they had been contacted. [ 470 ] on 9 april, french president emmanuel macron said that france could recognise a palestinian state by june, adding that he wanted to be part of a collective dynamic where those who defend palestine also recognise israel in turn. [ 471 ] the war's spillover has resulted in a major escalation of existing tensions between israel and iran, with groups in the axis of resistance launching attacks on american military bases , and the yemeni houthi movement attacking commercial vessels in the red sea and incurring a us-led military operation . [ 472 ] hezbollah in southern lebanon and the houthi movement in yemen launched limited attacks against israel shortly after the start of the war. iranian-backed militias in iraq and syria have also traded attacks with the us and idf. [ 473 ] israel has bombed targets in and around damascus throughout the war, [ 474 ] [ 475 ] [ 476 ] with an attack on the iranian embassy in damascus on 1 april 2024 leading to a series of retaliatory airstrikes on israel in response. [ 477 ] [ 478 ] on 31 july, hamas political leader ismail haniyeh was assassinated in tehran , where he had traveled to attend the inauguration of president masoud pezeshkian , [ 479 ] and on 1 october, iran fired approximately 200 missiles at israel. [ 480 ] [ 481 ] by the end of 2024, a year-long exchange of strikes between israel and hezbollah escalated into a brief israeli invasion of lebanon , before it was paused after a ceasefire . [ 482 ] the crisis has also seen the fall of the assad regime and an ongoing israeli invasion of syria . [ 483 ] [ 484 ] amnesty international released a report [ 485 ] on 5 february 2024 stating that israel is carrying out unlawful killings in the west bank and displaying "a chilling disregard for palestinian lives" and that israeli forces are carrying out numerous illegal acts of violence that constitute clear violations of international law. [ 486 ] [ 487 ] before the war, 2023 was the deadliest year for palestinians in the israeli-occupied west bank in 20 years. violence in the west bank has increased since the war began with more than 607 palestinians and over 25 israelis killed. [ 488 ] [ 489 ] at the same time, israeli settler violence further increased to around 1,270 attacks, against 856 for all of 2022. [ 490 ] about 1,000 palestinians have been forcibly displaced by settlers since 7 october and almost half of the clashes have included "israeli forces accompanying or actively supporting israeli settlers while carrying out the attacks" according to a u.n. report. [ 491 ] according to the west bank protection consortium, since the 7 october attacks six palestinian communities have been abandoned due to the violence. [ 492 ] on 19 october, more than 60 hamas members were arrested and 12 people were killed in overnight israeli raids across the west bank. those arrested included the movement's spokesperson in the west bank, hassan yousef . [ 493 ] in july, israeli authorities approved the seizure of 12.7 square kilometers of land in the occupied west bank. according to peace now , this was the largest single appropriation approved since the 1993 oslo accords." [ 494 ] israeli authorities also approved plans for almost 5,300 new houses in occupied west bank. [ 495 ] by july 2024, israeli land seizures exceeded the combined total of the previous 20 years. [ 496 ] the following month, the israeli government approved new settlements in the occupied west bank, [ 497 ] [ 498 ] and it was reported that israeli settlers had taken advantage of the ongoing war to expand settlement activity supported by a far-right israeli government , [ 499 ] [ 490 ] [ 500 ] including land seizure and large scale settlement plans. [ 501 ] on 7 august, wafa reported that israeli forces destroyed the regional headquarters of fatah in the balata camp . [ 502 ] [ 503 ] on 28 august, israel launched the largest military operation into the northern west bank in more than 20 years. israeli foreign minister israel katz said that the operation was a "full-fledged war". [ 504 ] israeli forces carried out simultaneous operations in jenin, tubas, nablus, ramallah and tulkarem. in jenin, israeli forces destroyed the city's infrastructure and carried out mass arrests of men and boys. civilians were trapped in their homes and denied access to food, water and medicine. members of the press were denied access to the city and the army blocked access to hospitals and ambulances. [ 505 ] a day later, un secretary general antonio guterres demanded a halt to the operations, [ 506 ] and eu foreign policy chief josep borrell said the operations "must not constitute the premises of a war extension from gaza, including full-scale destruction." [ 507 ] on 3 september, israeli media reported that the idf had classified the west bank as a "combat zone" and now viewed it as the second most important front in the war. [ 508 ] [ 509 ] yoav gallant said that israel was " mowing the lawn " with its west bank operations, but that it would eventually need to "pull out the roots". [ 510 ] on 6 september, turkish-american protestor ayşenur eygi was killed by an israeli sniper at a demonstration near nablus. [ 511 ] on 3 october, an israeli airstrike in tulkarm camp killed at least 20 people. [ 512 ] [ 513 ] on 13 november, israeli far-right finance minister bezalel smotrich said that with donald trump 's victory in the 2024 united states presidential election , israel was "a step away" from "sovereignty in judea and samaria." later comments by mike huckabee , chosen by trump as the next ambassador to israel, corroborated the possibility of an israeli annexation of the west bank. [ 514 ] on 21 january 2025, the idf said it launched a major raid in west bank. [ 515 ] [ 516 ] on 29 january, the idf said that it conducted a drone strike targeting a group of militants in tammun , killing at least 10 people. [ 517 ] [ 518 ] [ 519 ] on 30 november, two palestinian gunmen killed three and wounded eleven israeli civilians at a bus stop on the givat shaul interchange in jerusalem. hamas claimed responsibility. [ 520 ] on 16 february 2024, a palestinian gunman shot and killed two israeli civilians and injured four others in kiryat malakhi , israel. the shooter was killed by an off-duty idf reservist at the scene. [ 521 ] on 12 april, a 14-year-old israeli shepherd went missing near ramallah and was found dead a day later. on 15 april, two palestinians were killed by israeli settlers in aqraba . [ 522 ] on 13 may, at the tarqumiya checkpoint, a convoy of trucks carrying food supplies to gaza was attacked by israeli settlers, who damaged the trucks and threw supplies on the ground. [ 523 ] israel has increased its administrative detention of palestinians from the west bank and gaza, as well as palestinian citizens of israel, since the start of the war. administrative detention was already at a 20-year high before october 2023. [ 524 ] more than 11,000 palestinians are held in israeli jails, not counting detainees taken from gaza during the war. [ 525 ] at least 60 palestinians have died in israeli detention since 7 october. [ 526 ] they are held without charge or trial, which violates international law. [ 527 ] in december 2023, a military base at sde teiman in the negev desert was converted to a detention camp by the idf. whistleblowers and detainees reported beatings and torture of palestinian detainees at the camp, as well as amputations of limbs due to injuries sustained from handcuffing, medical neglect, arbitrary punishment and sexual abuse. prisoners have been coerced to make confessions that they are members of hamas. [ 528 ] [ 529 ] [ 530 ] after conditions in the camp came to light in may 2024, the supreme court of israel held a hearing and the idf began transferring 1,200 of the prisoners to ofer prison . [ 531 ] detainees have reported severe instances of violence during transfers between prisons. [ 526 ] [ 532 ] several palestinian healthcare workers have been abducted from gaza hospitals during sieges by israeli forces. [ 532 ] on 5 december, israeli forces abducted the adult men present at al-awda hospital and took them to sde teiman camp. dr. adnan al-bursh was detained and later died in israeli custody. [ 533 ] in march, israeli forces abducted khaled alser, lead author of the first lancet paper on trauma among gazan er patients and doctors, from nasser hospital. as of 31 august, he remains in detention and his whereabouts are unknown. [ 534 ] al-araby tv correspondent mohammed arab was abducted from the gaza strip in march 2024 and transferred to ofer prison in july. after reports of his treatment were leaked to al-araby, he was beaten, threatened and tortured. according to arab's testimony, prison guards used dogs and fire extinguishers to enact sexual violence on other prisoners. [ 525 ] in july 2024, military police raided sde teiman to arrest ten soldiers "suspected of the serious sexual abuse" of a palestinian detainee. israeli national security minister itamar ben-gvir and other members of the far-right otzma yehudit party condemned the arrests. [ 528 ] supporters of the arrested soldiers including ben gvir, amihai eliyahu , zvi sukkot , and nissim vaturi stormed sde teiman that night in protest. hours later, protestors broke into beit lid where the soldiers were being held. [ 535 ] on 7 october 2024, american journalist jeremy loffredo and three other international and israeli journalists were detained at a checkpoint in the west bank on suspicion of "assisting an enemy in war" for their reporting on the october 2024 iranian strikes against israel . the journalists' cameras and phones were confiscated. loffredo was released after four days in detention, and barred from leaving the country until 20 october. [ 536 ] as of february 2025, at least 160 healthcare workers from gaza were believed to be held in detention by israel, with another 24 missing after being taken from hospitals in gaza. al-shifa hospital director mohammed abu selmia, who was detained for 7 months and released without charges, detailed many of the abuses he faced and said that "no day passes without torture" in israeli prisons. [ 537 ] the extent of american support for israel has led the war to be labelled as 'the first us-israeli joint war'. [ 538 ] alongside substantial military, financial, and diplomatic support , the us also intervened in the war directly. 100 american soldiers were deployed in combat to man a thaad anti-air battery. [ 539 ] [ 540 ] in addition, america piloted drones over gaza in order to provide intelligence to israel. [ 541 ] this intelligence was aimed at locating palestinian militant leaders in gaza and the location of hostages; [ 542 ] this also included information on sinwar's location. [ 543 ] on 18 march 2025, israel launched a surprise attack [ 544 ] on the gaza strip , ending the 2025 gaza war ceasefire . these attacks killed more than 400 palestinians, including 263 women and children. [ 545 ] israel's government spokesman david mencer revealed that operation was "fully coordinated with washington" and thanked the trump administration "for their unyielding support for israel". [ 546 ] on 6 april, a second thaad system was deployed to israel by the us. [ 547 ] as of 8 april 2025 [update] , over 52,000 people – 50,810 palestinian [ 549 ] [ 553 ] and 1,706 israeli [ w ] – have been reported killed in the gaza war according to the official figures of the gaza health ministry, as well as 166 journalists and media workers , [ x ] 120 academics, [ 566 ] and over 224 humanitarian aid workers, a number that includes 179 employees of unrwa . [ 567 ] scholars have estimated 80% of palestinians killed are civilians. [ 551 ] [ 550 ] [ 552 ] [ 568 ] a study by ohchr , that verified fatalities from three independent sources, found that 70% of the palestinian killed in residential buildings or similar housing were women and children. [ 334 ] [ 569 ] the majority of casualties have been in the gaza strip . the gaza health ministry (ghm) total casualty count is the number of deaths directly caused by the war. the demographic breakdown is a subset of those individually identified. [ 570 ] [ 571 ] on 17 september 2024, the ghm published the names, gender and birth date of 34,344 individual palestinians whose identities were confirmed and continues to attempt to identify all casualties. [ 570 ] the ghm count does not include those who have died from "preventable disease, malnutrition and other consequences of the war". [ 572 ] an analysis by the gaza health projections working group predicted thousands of excess deaths from disease and birth complications. [ 573 ] in january 2025, a peer-reviewed analysis of deaths in the gaza war between october 2023 and 30 june 2024 was published in the lancet . the paper estimated 64,260 deaths from traumatic injury during this period, and likely exceeding 70,000 by october 2024, with 59.1% of them being women, children and the elderly. it concluded that the ghm underestimated trauma-related deaths by 41% in its report, and also noted that its findings "underestimate the full impact of the military operation in gaza, as they do not account for non-trauma-related deaths resulting from health service disruption, food insecurity, and inadequate water and sanitation." [ 7 ] a survey by pcpsr reported showed over 60% of gazans have lost family members since the war began. [ 574 ] [ 575 ] thousands of more dead bodies are thought to be under the rubble of destroyed buildings. [ 576 ] [ 577 ] the number of injured is greater than 100,000; [ 578 ] gaza has the most amputated children per capita in the world. [ 579 ] the 7 october attacks on israel killed 1,195 people, including 815 civilians. [ 50 ] a further 806 palestinians have been killed in the occupied west bank (including east jerusalem ). [ 580 ] casualties have also occurred in other parts of israel, as well as in southern lebanon , [ 581 ] syria , [ 582 ] yemen , [ 583 ] and iran . [ 584 ] according to the israeli ministry of defense's rehabilitation division, about 1,000 soldiers are wounded every month. [ 585 ] on 14 august 2024, the ministry predicted that it would have to account for 100,000 disabled idf veterans by 2030 due to the war. [ 586 ] the gaza strip is experiencing a humanitarian crisis as a result of the war, [ 587 ] [ 588 ] including a hunger crisis, in which famine-like conditions occurred in some areas of the strip and a high risk of famine persists as of october 2024, [ 589 ] [ 94 ] as well as a healthcare collapse . at the start of the war, israel tightened its blockade on the strip , resulting in significant shortages of fuel, food, medication, water, and essential medical supplies. [ 587 ] [ 590 ] [ 591 ] this siege resulted in a 90% drop in electricity availability, impacting hospital power supplies, sewage plants, and shutting down the desalination plants that provide drinking water. [ 592 ] in july 2024, available water worked out to 4.74 litres per person per day, just under a third of the recommended minimum in emergencies. [ 593 ] doctors warned of disease outbreaks spreading due to overcrowded hospitals. [ 588 ] a polio epidemic was the target of mostly-successful vaccination campaigns. [ 594 ] heavy bombardment by israeli airstrikes caused catastrophic damage to gaza's infrastructure, further deepening the crisis. direct attacks on telecommunications infrastructure by israel, electricity blockades, and fuel shortages caused the near-total collapse of gaza's largest cell network providers. [ 595 ] [ 596 ] [ 597 ] lack of internet access has obstructed gazan citizens from communicating with loved ones, learning of idf operations, and identifying both the areas most exposed to bombing and possible escape routes. [ 595 ] the blackouts impeded emergency services, making it harder to locate and access the time-critical injured, [ 595 ] and have impeded humanitarian aid agencies and journalists. [ 595 ] by december 2023, 200,000 gazans (approximately 10% of the population) had received internet access through an esim provided by connecting humanity . [ 598 ] the gaza health ministry reported over 4,000 children killed in the war's first month. [ 599 ] un secretary-general antónio guterres stated that gaza had "become a graveyard for children." [ y ] [ 602 ] [ 603 ] indirect palestinian deaths are expected to be much higher due to the intensity of the conflict, destruction of healthcare infrastructure, lack of food, water, shelter, and safe places for civilians to flee to, and reduction in unrwa funding, with a lancet study stating that the death toll in gaza, including future deaths indirectly caused by the war, may exceed 186,000. [ 551 ] [ 604 ] the scale and pace of destruction and damage of buildings in the gaza strip ranks among the most severe in modern history, [ 605 ] [ 606 ] [ 607 ] surpassing the bombing of dresden , hamburg , and london combined during world war ii , [ 608 ] [ 609 ] [ 610 ] [ z ] and included apartment buildings, hospitals, schools, religious sites, factories, shopping centres, and municipal infrastructure. [ 610 ] as of january 2024, researchers at oregon state university and the city university of new york estimated that 50–62% of buildings in the gaza strip had been damaged or destroyed. [ 612 ] [ 613 ] [ aa ] [ ab ] the damage to buildings in northern gaza reportedly exceeds that in bakhmut and mariupol in the russian invasion of ukraine , [ 609 ] aleppo in the battle of aleppo , [ 605 ] and mosul and raqqa in the war against the islamic state . [ 605 ] the 29,000 munitions israel had dropped on gaza in three months exceeded the amount (3,678) dropped by the us between 2004 and 2010 after its invasion of iraq . [ 616 ] according to satellite analyses, 68% of roads, 70% of greenhouses, and nearly 70% of tree crops have been damaged or destroyed. [ 617 ] after a year, the un estimates that a total of 42m tonnes of rubble clutter the strip, to clear and rebuild which might take 80 years and cost over $80bn. [ 618 ] the guardian reported that the scale of destruction has led international legal experts to raise the concept of domicide , which it describes as "the mass destruction of dwellings to make [a] territory uninhabitable". [ 606 ] the term urbicide has also been used to refer to the destruction of gazan cities and their institutions. [ 619 ] in october 2024, after monitoring and analyzing israel's war conduct in gaza for more than a year, forensic architecture published a cartographic map platform detailing israel's campaign in gaza titled "a cartography of genocide", accompanied by an 827-page text report that concludes that "israel's military campaign in gaza is organised, systematic, and intended to destroy conditions of life and life-sustaining infrastructure". [ 620 ] a un commission to the israel–palestine conflict stated that there is "clear evidence that war crimes may have been committed in the latest explosion of violence in israel and gaza, and all those who have violated international law and targeted civilians must be held accountable." [ 621 ] [ 622 ] [ 623 ] on 27 october, a spokesperson for the office of the united nations high commissioner for human rights (ohchr) called for an independent court to review potential war crimes committed by both sides. [ 624 ] the international criminal court (icc) confirmed that its mandate to investigate alleged war crimes committed since june 2014 in the state of palestine extends to the current conflict. [ 625 ] [ 626 ] on 20 may, icc prosecutor karim khan announced his intention to seek arrest warrants against hamas leaders yahya sinwar, mohammed deif and ismail haniyeh, as well as israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu and then-minister of defense yoav gallant, for alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity during the war. [ 627 ] [ 628 ] [ 629 ] on 21 november, the icc issued arrest warrants for netanyahu, gallant, and deif for alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity. [ 630 ] [ 631 ] [ 632 ] the icc canceled deif's arrest warrant after confirming his death. [ 633 ] on 7 june 2024, both israel and hamas were added to the list of shame , an annex attached to an annual report submitted by the un secretary-general documenting rights violations against children in armed conflict. while past reports accused israel of grave rights violations against children, the country was never included in the annex. [ 634 ] [ 635 ] [ 636 ] on 19 june 2024, the un independent international commission of inquiry on the occupied palestinian territory presented a detailed report to the united nations human rights council covering the war from 7 october to 31 december 2023, affirming that both hamas and israel committed war crimes and that israel's actions also constituted crimes against humanity. [ 637 ] in a second report, the commission found that israel had carried out a policy of destroying gaza's healthcare system. [ 638 ] [ 639 ] the june report found that the military wing of hamas and six other palestinian armed groups were responsible for the war crimes of intentionally directing attacks against civilians, murder or willful killing, torture, inhuman or cruel treatment, destroying or seizing the property, outrages upon personal dignity, and taking hostages, including children. [ 640 ] [ 641 ] in relation to idf operations and attacks in gaza, the commission concluded that israeli authorities are responsible for the war crimes of starvation as a method of warfare, murder or willful killing, intentionally directing attacks against civilians and civilian objects, forcible transfer, sexual violence, torture and inhuman or cruel treatment, arbitrary detention and outrages upon personal dignity. it also found that israel committed numerous crimes against humanity, including carrying out the extermination of palestinians and gender persecution targeting palestinian men and boys. [ 642 ] [ 643 ] [ 644 ] the commission said that they had submitted 7,000 pieces of evidence to the icc related to crimes committed by israel and hamas, as part of the international criminal court investigation in palestine . [ 645 ] in another report published in october 2024, the commission accused israel of "committing war crimes and the crime against humanity of extermination with relentless and deliberate attacks on medical personnel and facilities" as well as accusing the idf of deliberately killing and torturing medical personnel, targeting medical vehicles, and restricting patients from leaving gaza. the report also addressed the detention of palestinians in israeli military camps and facilities, finding that thousands of child and adult detainees, many arbitrarily detained, faced widespread abuse, including physical and psychological violence, rape and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence, and conditions amounting to torture, highlighting that deaths resulting from such abuse or neglect constituted war crimes and violations of the right to life. israel refused to cooperate with the investigation, contending that it had an "anti-israel" bias. [ 639 ] [ 646 ] on 5 december 2024, amnesty international published a report concluding that israel was committing genocide against palestinians in the gaza strip; [ 95 ] [ 647 ] and on 19 december 2024, human rights watch published a 179-page report concluding that israel is responsible for the crime of genocide by intentionally depriving palestinians in gaza of access to safe water for drinking and sanitation needed for basic human survival. [ 648 ] on 13 march 2025, the un independent international commission of inquiry on the occupied palestinian territory released a report stating that israel's attacks on women's healthcare facilities in gaza amounted to genocidal acts, destroying "in part the reproductive capacity of palestinians in gaza as a group". [ 649 ] israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu condemned the report as "false and absurd", and accused un human rights council of being anti-israel and anti-semitic. [ 650 ] the war sparked a diplomatic crisis , with countries around the world reacting strongly to the conflict that affected the momentum of regional relations. [ 651 ] at least nine countries withdrew their ambassadors or cut diplomatic ties with israel. [ 652 ] [ 653 ] the war has also resulted in a renewed focus on a two-state solution to the broader conflict. [ 654 ] [ 655 ] global public opinion of israel dropped during the war; a morning consult poll published in january 2024 indicated that the united states was the only remaining wealthy country in which israel had net positive approval. [ 656 ] negotiations have focused on the possibility of a ceasefire , with united states , egypt and qatar serving as negotiation mediators between israel and hamas. [ 657 ] [ 658 ] the united nations security council passed resolution 2728 in march 2024, demanding an immediate ceasefire and the unconditional release of hostages for the month of ramadan . [ 285 ] [ 659 ] the united nations security council passed resolution 2735 in june 2024, demanding acceptance of the three-phase ceasefire proposal. [ 660 ] following talks mediated by china , on 23 july 2024, palestinian groups including hamas and fatah reached an agreement to end their divisions and form a unity government for gaza, which they announced in the beijing declaration . [ 661 ] at the unga, saudi arabia announced a global alliance to push for a two-state solution. norwegian foreign minister espen barth eide said almost 90 countries were at the launch of the global alliance for the implementation of a palestinian state and a two-state solution. [ 662 ] [ 663 ] [ 664 ] on 29 september, saudi arabia said they would send aid to the palestinian authority, $60 million in six installments according to a senior pa official. the aid is seen as means of keeping the pa solvent and maintaining the push for a two-state solution, notwithstanding israeli financial restrictions. [ 665 ] the israeli government's response to the october 7 hamas-led attack on israel has multiple aspects, including a military response leading to the israeli invasion of the gaza strip . in october, the knesset approved a war cabinet in israel , adding national unity ministers and altering the government; benjamin netanyahu and benny gantz froze non-war legislation, establishing a war cabinet with military authority. settler expansions and officials' remarks heightened unrest, leading to protests within israel . the knesset's law criminalizing "terrorist materials" consumption drew criticism. [ 666 ] in an interview to the wall street journal on 25 december, netanyahu said that israel's objectives were to "destroy hamas, demilitarize gaza and deradicalize the whole of palestinian society". [ 667 ] there was broad support in israeli society for military operations in gaza. [ 668 ] [ 669 ] public opinion poll conducted in december 2023 by the israel democracy institute found that 87% of jewish israelis supported the war in gaza. [ 670 ] initially, palestinian president mahmoud abbas asserted the palestinian people's right to self-defense against the "terror of settlers and occupation troops" [ 671 ] and condemned the orders by israel for residents to evacuate north gaza, labeling it a "second nakba". [ 672 ] later, abbas rejected the killing of civilians on both sides, and said that the palestinian liberation organization was the sole representative of the palestinian people. [ 673 ] significant geopolitical divisions emerged during the war. much of the western world provided strong diplomatic and military support to israel, [ 674 ] including the united states , [ 675 ] united kingdom , [ 676 ] and germany , [ 677 ] however several european nations have been less supportive of israel's actions, most notably spain , norway , and ireland who formally recognised the state of palestine in a coordinated move in june 2024. [ 678 ] spain and ireland have also supported south africa's genocide case against israel . [ 679 ] [ 680 ] this has led to retaliatory action by israel, who recalled its ambassadors to all three countries and later announced that it would be closing its embassy in dublin. [ 681 ] [ 682 ] [ 683 ] hugh lovatt of the european council on foreign relations says that during the cold war, israel sided with the west against the arab countries supported by the soviets, and western leaders generally see israel "as a fellow member of the liberal democratic club" and that this partially "explains the continued strong western support for israel – which has now largely become reflexive". [ 674 ] at least 44 nations denounced hamas and explicitly condemned its conduct on 7 october as terrorism, including a joint statement by the us, uk, france, italy, and germany. [ 684 ] in contrast, the islamic world and much of the global south denounced the actions of israel and its allies, criticizing the "moral authority of the west" and alleging that it holds double standards surrounding human rights . [ 674 ] [ 685 ] the double standards, in their view, is condemning russia's invasion and occupation of ukrainian land while standing firmly behind israel's occupation of palestinian territory. [ 686 ] bolivia has cut all ties with israel as a result of the conflict, while colombia and chile recalled their ambassadors to the country. [ 235 ] [ 685 ] the united states, united kingdom, and germany have supplied israel with substantial military and medical aid. [ 676 ] [ 687 ] [ 688 ] the israeli government's response prompted international protests , arrests, and harassment . [ 689 ] brazil announced a rescue operation of nationals using an air force transport aircraft. [ 690 ] poland announced that it would deploy two c-130 transport planes to evacuate 200 polish nationals. [ 691 ] hungary evacuated 215 of its nationals from israel using two aircraft on 9 october, while romania evacuated 245 of its citizens, including two pilgrimage groups, on two tarom planes and two private aircraft on the same day. [ 692 ] australia also announced repatriation flights. [ 693 ] 300 nigerian pilgrims in israel fled to jordan before being airlifted home. [ 694 ] on 12 october, the united kingdom arranged flights for its citizens in israel; the first plane departed ben gurion airport that day. the government had said before that it would not be evacuating its nationals due to available commercial flights. however, most commercial flights were suspended. [ 695 ] nepal arranged a flight to evacuate at least 254 of its citizens who were studying in israel. [ 696 ] india launched operation ajay to evacuate its citizens from israel. [ 697 ] ukraine facilitated the evacuation of ~450 of its citizens from israel as of 18 october, with additional evacuation flights planned for the near future. [ 698 ] according to daniel byman and alexander palmer, the attack showcased the decline of the palestine liberation organization (plo) and the rise of hamas as a power center in palestinian politics . they predicted the plo's further decline if the status quo held. [ 699 ] laith alajlouni wrote that the immediate effect of the hamas offensive was to unite hamas and plo. [ 700 ] amit segal , chief political commentator for israel's channel 12 , said that the conflict would test benjamin netanyahu's survival as prime minister , noting that past wars had toppled the governments of several of his predecessors such as that of golda meir following the 1973 yom kippur war, menachem begin following the 1982 lebanon war , and ehud olmert following the 2006 lebanon war . [ 701 ] citing the israeli intelligence failure, which some observers attributed to the incumbent government focusing more on internal dissent, the judicial reform , and efforts to deepen israel's occupation of the palestinian territories, [ 702 ] some commentators criticized netanyahu for putting aside the plo and propping up hamas, [ 158 ] and described him as a liability. [ 703 ] [ 704 ] in an analysis by the times of israel , the newspaper wrote, "hamas has violently shifted the world's eyes back to the palestinians and dealt a severe blow to the momentum for securing a landmark us-brokered deal between israel and saudi arabia." [ 705 ] andreas kluth wrote in his bloomberg news column that hamas "torched biden's deal to remake the middle east", arguing that the deal that was being discussed between saudi arabia, israel, and the us would have left palestinians in the cold, so the group decided to "blow the whole thing up". he added that viewed from gaza, things were only going to get worse, considering that netanyahu's coalition partners opposed a two-state solution. he suggested they would prefer to annex the entirety of the west bank, even at the expense of turning israel into an apartheid state. [ 706 ] the bank of israel estimates that by 2025, the war will have cost the country us$ 67 billion, notwithstanding a $14.5 billion us aid package, part of the $22.76 billion the u.s. has so far allocated for military assistance. [ 707 ] [ ac ] as early as 9 november 2023, the bank of israel reported that the drop in labor supply caused by the war was costing the israeli economy $600 million a week, or 6% of weekly gdp. the bank also stated that the estimate did not include damage caused by the absence of palestinian and foreign workers. [ 709 ] in the final quarter of 2023, the israeli economy shrank by 5.2% quarter-to-quarter due to labour shortages in construction and from the mobilization of 300,000 reservists. [ 710 ] while israel did still see economic growth of 2%, this was down from 6.5% growth in the year before the war. consumer spending declined by 27%, imports declined by 42% and exports declined by 18%. israel's high-tech factories reported in december that recent bureaucratic obstacles with electronic imports from china had led to higher import costs and delayed delivery times. [ 711 ] israeli officials also reported that china had refused to send workers to their country during the war against the backdrop of a worker shortage in israel's construction and farming sectors. [ 712 ] china's actions were described as a de facto sanction . [ 713 ] [ 711 ] the 3,500-member water transport workers federation of india said it would refuse to operate shipments carrying weapons to israel. [ 714 ] the declaration came a few months after one indian company halted production of israeli police uniforms due to the war in gaza. [ 715 ] about 9,855 thai workers in the agricultural sector, 4,331 workers in the construction sector and 2,997 in the nursing sector left israel following the 7 october attack. in addition, the prevention of 85,000 palestinian workers from entering israel created a shortage of about 100,000 foreign and palestinian workers. [ 716 ] it has been calculated that the carbon cost in terms of climate impact of rebuilding gaza would exceed the annual greenhouse emissions of 135 countries. [ 717 ] in reporting on the conflict, foreign media have limited access to gaza and only in the presence of israeli soldiers. vox reported that the news organizations "have to submit all materials and footage to the idf for review before publication". [ 718 ] the conflict has also seen large numbers of journalists wounded or killed in action. on 14 december, cbs reported on a statement from the international federation of journalists that "the number of journalists killed in the past two months in the war in gaza has surpassed the amount killed in the vietnam war , which lasted two decades". [ 719 ] reporters without borders filed a complaint with the international criminal court under section 8.2.b of the rome statute , accusing israel of committing war crimes against 8 journalists. [ 720 ] [ 718 ] it also lodged a complaint against hamas, under section 8.2.a of the rome statute for the killing of a reporter covering the 7 october attack. [ 720 ] the committee to protect journalists accused israel of targeting journalists reporting from gaza and their families, saying that in at least two cases, "journalists reported receiving threats from israeli officials and israel defense forces officers before their family members were killed". [ 721 ] israeli estimates of 36,000+ palestinians killed, including nearly 20,000 militants, [ 17 ] are widely criticised as inaccurate , and no evidence has been presented for the claims of militants having been killed. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] us intelligence estimate: 10,000–15,000 militants (as of january 2025) [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ]

red-tabara (from feb 2025) [ 2 ] mai-mai rushaba (from march 2025) [ 3 ] rwanda [ a ] the m23 campaign is an ongoing series of military offensives launched by the march 23 movement (m23), a rwandan-backed rebel paramilitary group in the democratic republic of the congo , since march 2022. in november 2021, m23 first launched attacks against the congolese military (fardc) and monusco , seizing military positions in ndiza, cyanzu, and runyoni in north kivu province . [ 52 ] this coincided with the deployment of uganda people's defence force (updf) to the region to combat the allied democratic forces (adf), a ugandan rebel group operating in the congo's north kivu and ituri provinces. [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] the conflict escalated between march and june 2022, as m23 overran key areas in rutshuru territory , including the strategic border town of bunagana , forcing congolese soldiers to flee into uganda. [ 53 ] [ 52 ] [ 57 ] [ 13 ] uganda alleged that rwanda orchestrated the offensive to undermine updf operations against the adf, while rwanda counterclaimed that uganda was leveraging m23 elements to threaten its national security. [ 53 ] the drc accused rwanda of provisioning armaments and reorganizing the insurgency, a claim substantiated by a united nations security council (unsc) group of experts report. [ 53 ] rwanda and m23, in turn, accused the drc of collaborating with the democratic forces for the liberation of rwanda (fdlr) and claimed their campaign aimed to protect banyamulenge from fdlr aggression. [ 58 ] [ 59 ] a unsc report noted that rwandan military incursions into congolese territory had begun prior to alleged fardc-fdlr cooperation, with analysts posited that m23's resurgence was primarily driven by economic and commercial interests rather than ethno-political or security concerns. [ 60 ] [ 53 ] the conflict drew regional involvement, leading the east african community (eac) to deploy the east african community regional force (eacrf) to stabilize the situation. [ 61 ] on 26 january 2023, m23 captured kitchanga . [ 62 ] exasperated by the perceived inaction of the eacrf, the congolese government sought military assistance from the southern african development community (sadc) and established a reserve corps, which encouraged the formation of militias under the wazalendo movement near m23-controlled areas. [ 63 ] in june 2023, human rights watch documented widespread human rights abuses by m23, including extrajudicial executions , sexual violence , and other war crimes , with allegations of rwandan complicity. [ 64 ] the unsc subsequently called for sanctions against m23 leaders and implicated high-ranking rwandan officials in the violence. [ 64 ] by march 2024, m23 had launched further offensives, including a northern push into rutshuru territory, capturing rwindi and the vitshumbi fishery along lake edward . [ 65 ] an april unsc-commissioned report estimated that between 3,000 and 4,000 rwandan defence force (rdf) troops were present in eastern drc, surpassing the estimated 3,000 m23 combatants. [ 65 ] [ 66 ] in june 2024, m23 and rdf forces seized kanyabayonga and kirumba and entering lubero territory for the first time. [ 65 ] diplomatic efforts, led by angolan president joão lourenço , faltered after president paul kagame failed to attend a tripartite summit in luanda on 15 december, which was meant to address the fdlr issue alongside president félix tshisekedi and president lourenço. [ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] rwanda's absence fueled suspicions that its involvement in eastern drc was driven primarily by economic interests, particularly access to kivu 's mineral resources , rather than security concerns. [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] beginning in january 2025, m23 began making major advances towards goma and bukavu , the provincial capitals of north kivu and south kivu , with alleged rwandan backing, intensifying growing tensions between the two nations. by 30 january, m23 had captured all of goma and began an advance towards bukavu, capturing the town by 16 february. following the capture of goma, m23 announced their intentions to march on kinshasa . [ 75 ] the march 23 movement waged a rebellion in the northeastern democratic republic of the congo (drc) from 2012 to 2013. m23 was formed by deserters of the national congress for the defence of the people (cndp), who had integrated into the armed forces of the democratic republic of the congo (fardc) following a 2009 peace agreement. [ 4 ] [ 21 ] [ 57 ] the agreement, which was negotiated after the arrest of cndp leader general laurent nkunda , included provisions for prisoner releases, cndp's transformation into a political party, refugee reintegration, and the incorporation of cndp members into government institutions and the national army. [ 76 ] however, resistance from local communities—who viewed cndp leaders as perpetrators of crimes—hindered the full implementation of these measures. [ 76 ] ex-cndp fighters within the military were accused of exploiting their positions for illegal mineral trade. the rebellion formally commenced on 6 may 2012, culminating in clashes with the congolese army and the united nations organization stabilization mission in the democratic republic of the congo (monusco). [ 76 ] both the cndp as well as the 23 march movement's first rebellion were supported by rwanda and uganda. [ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 57 ] human rights watch accused m23 of committing war crimes, including summary executions , sexual violence , and forced recruitment, and suggested that some rwandan officials were complicit due to their continued support for m23 operations. [ 76 ] the uprising was defeated by a joint campaign of the drc and monusco force. after agreeing to a peace deal, m23 was largely dismantled, its fighters disarmed and moved into refugee camp in uganda . [ 4 ] despite the agreement, hostilities between m23 and the dr congo continued. in 2017, m23 commander sultani makenga and about 100 to 200 of his followers fled from uganda to resume their insurgency, setting up camp at mount mikeno in the border area between rwanda, uganda, and the dr congo. [ 13 ] [ 79 ] on 7 november 2021, makenga's troops carried out a small-scale attack on fardc positions in ndiza, cyanzu, and runyoni, resulting in four fatalities. [ 52 ] however, this offensive had little impact, as m23 no longer received significant international support. that same month, uganda and the drc had greatly improved their relations, cooperating against a common enemy, the allied democratic forces , [ 13 ] during operation shujaa . [ 41 ] in early 2022, a growing number of m23 combatants began leaving their camps and moving back to the drc; [ 4 ] the rebel movement launched more attacks in february 2022, but these were repelled. [ 13 ] the m23 leadership argued that parts of their movement had resumed the insurgency because the conditions of the 2013 peace deal were not being honored by the drc government. [ 4 ] [ 57 ] the rebels also argued that they were attempting to defend kivu's tutsi minority from attacks by democratic forces for the liberation of rwanda (fdlr), [ 20 ] although critics pointed out that the fdlr no longer posed a substantial threat and that m23 operations had commenced before fardc-fdlr cooperation intensified. [ 80 ] [ 60 ] [ 53 ] meanwhile, ugandan authorities accused rwanda of reigniting m23's insurgency after its economic interests in the drc were disrupted. [ 53 ] earlier, in june 2021, presidents paul kagame and félix tshisekedi signed an agreement permitting dither ltd—allegedly linked to the rwandan military—to refine gold extracted by sakima . [ 53 ] this deal was seen as an effort to cut off funding for armed groups profiting from mineral smuggling. however, as allegations of rwandan backing for m23 grew, the drc suspended the agreement in early june 2022. [ 53 ] the situation was further complicated by the factionalism within m23, as the movement was split into rival groups, namely the "alliance for the salvation of the people" headed by jean-marie runiga , and the "revolutionary army of congo" of bertrand bisimwa respectively. [ 24 ] [ 35 ] in addition, makenga's group was de facto separate from the other m23 forces which were still mainly based in uganda. [ 36 ] later research organized by the united nations security council suggested that makenga's return to an insurgency had started the gradual rearmament and restoration of m23, with bisimwa's "revolutionary army of congo" joining these efforts in late 2021 by reorganizing its remaining fighters and recruiting new ones in cooperation with makenga. the headquarters of the restored m23 is believed to be located at mount sabyinyo . [ 35 ] by 2022, m23 was just one of 120 armed groups that operated in the eastern dr congo. [ 41 ] before march 2022, the congolese government made attempts to reinforce its position against the resurgent m23 by sending more troops. however, such measures weakened its presence in other areas, such as those affected by the allied democratic forces insurgency . [ 35 ] in the night of 27 march 2022, m23 rebels launched a new offensive in north kivu , [ 81 ] first attacking the villages of tshanzu and runyoni in the rutshuru territory [ 82 ] from their strongholds at the surrounding hills. [ 57 ] the two villages had been important strongholds of the m23 movement during the 2012–13 rebellion. [ 82 ] the rebel attack was reportedly led by sultani makenga. [ 13 ] the drc government claimed that rwanda supported the insurgent operation, a claim which was denied by the rwandan government [ 4 ] and the rebels. [ 57 ] international crisis group researcher onesphore sematumba argued that claims about rwandan aid were believable. he suggested that the resurgence of m23 was probably influenced by rwanda's wish to stop an infrastructure project that would link the dr congo and uganda. [ 57 ] on 29 march, the fardc was able to repel a rebel attack against the border town of bunagana , but m23 captured several villages, including mugingo, gasiza, chengerero, rugamba, kibote, baseke and kabindi. [ 81 ] also, a un helicopter crashed at tshanzu , killing eight monusco peacekeepers (six pakistanis, a russian, and a serbian). the fardc blamed m23 rebels for shooting down the aircraft. [ 4 ] [ 83 ] at bunagana, the fardc received support by the uganda people's defence force (updf). updf ground forces crossed the border, while ugandan aircraft bombed the rebels. [ 13 ] [ 14 ] by 1 april, the clashes at rutshuru had displaced 46,000 locals according to unhcr . [ 84 ] meanwhile, the m23 fighters temporarily retreated to their mountain bases, with their first attacks being regarded as a failure. [ 13 ] they proclaimed a unilateral ceasefire. [ 83 ] [ 85 ] one ex-m23 officer told the newspaper taz that it was entirely unclear what the rebel offensive was trying to achieve, with him speculating that makenga was possibly hoping for one last battle to die in his homeland. [ 13 ] on 6 april, the fardc rejected any negotiations with the m23 forces based in the dr congo, and started a counter-attack. [ 83 ] four days later, m23 announced that it would withdraw its troops from any villages captured during the earlier clashes. [ 85 ] however, as the fighting raged on, fardc increasingly lost ground to the insurgents. [ 83 ] in late april, the drc government and several rebel groups held peace talks in nairobi , [ 21 ] but the bisimwa faction of m23 voluntarily left [ 24 ] or was expelled from the negotiations due to the ongoing clashes in north kivu. [ 21 ] [ 20 ] m23 forces, reportedly led by makenga [ 21 ] and including the bisimwa faction, [ 24 ] restarted their offensive in may. [ 21 ] this operation was reportedly supported by at least 1,000 rwandan soldiers. [ 6 ] according to a local, m23 overran kibumba on 18 may. [ 42 ] on 19 may, m23 rebels attacked monusco peacekeepers at shangi , rutshuru territory, as the latter joined the fardc in counter-insurgency operations. the rebel leadership declared that the attack was in response to a previous joint fardc-fdlr operation. [ 20 ] [ c ] from 22 may, the rebels attempted to advance on north kivu's provincial capital, goma , [ 21 ] displacing 70,000 people. [ 86 ] from 22 to 23 may, a battle raged at kibumba, while the insurgents temporarily seized rumangabo before it was retaken by the fardc. [ 42 ] according to independent researchers, the insurgents were supported by rwandan soldiers during the battle for rumangabo. [ 6 ] on 25 may, m23 reached the outskirts of goma [ 21 ] but were repelled by monusco, fardc, [ 86 ] and the fdlr [ 6 ] after heavy fighting. the insurgents subsequently retreated, and there was a pause in fighting for the rest of the month. [ 86 ] at this point, the fardc accused the rwanda defence force (rdf) of fighting directly alongside the rebels, claiming that local vigilantes had captured two rwandan soldiers. on the other side, rwanda claimed that the dr congo had fired rockets into its territory, was aided by the fdlr, [ 21 ] and had "abducted" the two rdf soldiers. [ 8 ] the fighting also stoked local ethnic tensions; north kivu's deputy police commander, francois-xavier aba van ang, released a video urging civilians to organize as militiamen to combat m23 in a "people's war". [ 21 ] the fardc also armed existing local militias so that they could assist in the campaign against m23. [ 6 ] by early june, clashes again took place at bunagana. [ 37 ] [ 86 ] m23 militants reportedly attacked a monusco force at muhati , rutshuru territory, on 8 june. [ 8 ] on 12 june, the fardc repelled another m23 attack on bunagana, coinciding with the visit of king philippe of belgium at bukavu to the south. [ 87 ] unlike the previous attack on bunagana, however, the ugandan security forces across the border did not intervene and instead retreated from the hills overlooking the town. [ 14 ] m23 captured bunagana on the following day, reportedly after encircling it and thus forcing the local garrison [ 88 ] of 137 soldiers and 37 police officers to retreat to kisoro in uganda. [ 41 ] [ 89 ] there, they surrendered to the local ugandan security forces. many civilians also fled across the border. [ 41 ] later, the commanders of the bunagana garrison, colonels ndyadya and lobo, and the regional sector commander, peter cirimwami nkuba , accused each other of having given the order to retreat. [ 90 ] north kivu's military governor constant ndima kongba initially denied that the fardc had lost the city, [ 88 ] but the fardc spokesman sylvain ekenge later declared that the fall of bunagana constituted "no less than an invasion" by rwanda. [ 91 ] tensions between rwanda and the dr congo consequently continued to escalate, as the latter suspended "all agreements" with the former. [ 92 ] at this point, two senior congolese security sources [ 88 ] and members of the congolese parliament also accused uganda of supporting the rebel offensive. the congolese parliamentarians claimed that the ugandan retreat before the rebel attack had facilitated the takeover, and specifically singled out muhoozi kainerugaba , head of the ugandan troops involved in operation shujaa, for supporting m23. the dr congo proceeded to terminate the military cooperation with uganda. [ 14 ] the ugandan government subsequently halted operation shujaa, while the ugandan military claimed that m23's latest attacks did not pose a threat to ugandan citizens and equipment, making an intervention on their part unnecessary. [ 92 ] the local monusco leadership stated that the claims about the ugandan support for m23 were "nonsense" and called for calm and cooperation. [ 93 ] kenyan president uhuru kenyatta reacted to the fall of bunagana and the growing regional tensions by calling for the east african community (eac) to "immediate[ly]" organize a new peacekeeping mission called the "east african regional force" to restore security in the eastern dr congo. [ 94 ] meanwhile, monusco began to prepare its local troops to support the efforts of the congolese security forces to retake the city. [ 95 ] fardc troops belonging to operations sector "sokola 2" launched an attack from kabindi on 16 june, [ 96 ] and later claimed that they had recaptured bunagana. [ 97 ] however, the city was reportedly still in rebel hands on the following day, with heavy fighting taking place to its west. [ 14 ] [ 98 ] m23 reportedly counter-attacked, capturing the town of tshengerero [ 99 ] and the villages of bugusa, kabindi and rangira. the insurgents were advancing on rutshuru , and shot down a fardc helicopter. [ 100 ] fighting had also spread into the virunga national park . environmentalists pointed out that this threatened the survival of the local mountain gorillas . [ 101 ] the renewed advances of m23 were reportedly part of a plan by sultani makenga to cut off and eventually capture goma, hoping to extract political concessions from the congolese government in this way. [ 102 ] by 18–19 june, the frontline had stabilized along the rutshuru-bunagana axis. combined fardc-monusco forces still held settlements in the direct vicinity of tshengerero such as ntamugenga and rwanguba, including the latter's important bridge. [ 103 ] [ 104 ] fighting shifted to the runyoni-rumangabo axis, where clashes were reported at the villages of kavumu and bikenge. [ 104 ] meanwhile, an eac meeting was organized in nairobi to discuss the diplomatic tensions between the dr congo, rwanda, and uganda as well as the deployment of a new peacekeeping force in reaction to the m23 attacks. the drc government declared that it would welcome an eac peacekeeping mission, but only under the condition of rwanda's exclusion from the operation. [ 105 ] [ 106 ] the eac subsequently called on m23 to retreat from bunagana [ 107 ] as precondition for a ceasefire, but the insurgents rejected the order. [ 108 ] instead, m23 reopened the bunagana border post under its own administration, [ 109 ] whereupon north kivu's government forbid the import and export of goods through rebel-held territory. [ 110 ] from 19 to 22 june, clashes continued as m23 attempted to break through fardc defense positions. at first, the rebels assaulted villages along the southern axis, but were repelled at karambi, kitagoma and kitovu, bweza, and busanza. they subsequently focused on bikenge, ruvumu, shangi, and bukima, overrunning the villages before the fardc organized a counter-attack. the military was able to retake most of these settlements, though ruvumu, buharo, and rutokara reportedly remained rebel-held. overall, the pro-government forces generally held their positions, but the rebel assaults increasingly threatened the matebe-rwanguba axis. [ 111 ] [ 112 ] human rights watch reported that 17 civilians, including two children, had been summarily executed by m23 on 21 june for suspected collaboration with the fardc. [ 113 ] according to the newspaper eco news , the fardc reportedly inflicted a defeat on m23 at the runyoni frontline around this time, wounding sultani makenga and killing another rebel commander, colonel yusuf mboneza . [ 26 ] mboneza's death was later disputed by pro-m23 sources. [ 27 ] there was a lull in fighting from 24 to 27 june. [ 114 ] combat resumed on 28 june, as rebels attacked fardc positions at bushandaba, ruseke and the strategic hill of bikona. [ 115 ] pro-government forces, consisting of the military and police, counter-attacked, and retook the villages of nkokwe, ruvumu, rugarama, rutakara, ntamugenga and rutsiro. [ 116 ] on 29 june, the fardc continued its advance, capturing kabindi and chengerero, though m23 militants countered by attacking rutsiro. [ 117 ] on 1 july, the fardc claimed to had won a major victory over m23 and allied rwandan troops after heavy fighting at rutsiro, ntamugenga and nyabikona, [ 118 ] completely evicting the insurgents from the bweza grouping ( french : groupement ) in rutshuru. [ 119 ] clashes continued at bikenge and ruseke on 4 july, as the fardc repelled m23 assaults. [ 120 ] on 6 july, the fardc reorganized the leadership of the forces opposing m23 to improve their efficiency; [ 28 ] in addition, rwandan president paul kagame and the congolese president félix tshisekedi held a meeting on the same day. according to the congolese side, a ceasefire and the withdrawal of m23 from congolese soil was agreed upon. instead of adhering to this agreement, the rebels attacked kanyabusoro and rwanguba on the following day. [ 121 ] over the next days, clashes continued at various villages in the bweza and jomba groupements , as m23 attempted to retake territory. [ 122 ] [ 123 ] at the same time, however, combat died down along other parts of the frontline. [ 124 ] in the following days, combat largely ceased in the bweza and jomba groupements , but fighting erupted in the kisigari groupement and at two important hills near rumangabo. [ 125 ] heavy fighting also took place in the bashali-mukoto groupement of bashali chiefdom , as two " nyatura " factions clashed. one of them was a "dissident" group led by jean-marie nyatura who was considered close to m23; jean-marie nyatura's force attempted to capture several villages before being evicted from most of them by its local rivals. [ 126 ] after this point, there was again a lull in fighting. [ 127 ] negotiations continued between rwanda and the dr congo under international mediation, though little progress was made. [ 128 ] on 14 july, ugandan president yoweri museveni made another attempt at convincing m23 and the congolese government to organize a ceasefire. [ 129 ] meanwhile, monusco and the fardc announced that they were shifting forces from other areas to prepare for an operation to fully push m23 back. [ 130 ] on 18 july, congolese government spokesman patrick muyaya katembwe reaffirmed that any negotiations with the rebels depended on m23 retreating from its occupied territory beforehand. [ 131 ] by the end of july, m23 was installing its own officials in the occupied territories and raised a tax. [ 132 ] violent protests also erupted in goma and other eastern congolese cities, with civilians attacking monusco members and buildings, accusing the organization of inaction in the face of the ongoing regional rebellions. protesters, monusco peacekeepers, and bystanders were killed during the clashes. [ 133 ] the north africa post alleged that the rebels had used the protests as cover for attacks, and had been involved in an attack on moroccan peacekeepers at nyamilima. [ 134 ] one monusco soldier was killed in a direct clash with m23 at bunagana. [ 135 ] on 27 july, fighting between m23 and fardc resumed at kabingo, rutshuru, as the rebels attempted to harvest the crops planted by locals but were confronted by government soldiers. [ 136 ] on 2 august, the rebels and fardc fought at five villages in rutshuru. [ 137 ] in the following weeks, however, a truce held along the frontline. this was condemned by many local civilians who argued that it allowed the rebels to consolidate their territorial gains. [ 138 ] on 15 august, the first contingent of east african community peacekeepers arrived in kivu . [ 139 ] this group, consisting of burundian soldiers , pledged to assist in the campaign against m23 and other insurgent factions. [ 15 ] the arrival of the burundian peacekeepers received mixed reactions by local civil groups; some welcomed them, some considered the burundians to be exploitative foreigners, and some took a more neutral stance. [ 140 ] sporadic clashes restarted on 16 august, when rebels, allegedly supported by rwandan troops, attacked rwanguba, rangira, and muhibira in rutshuru. [ 141 ] [ 142 ] the m23 leadership claimed that these operations were in response to fardc aggression, and declared that it wanted a "dialogue" with the government. [ 143 ] on 19 august, m23 shelled fardc positions at jomba, bweza and busanza. [ 144 ] fighting renewed on 20 october after according to the fardc, m23 attacked a military post. on 23 october m23 group captured the town of ntamugenga killing five soldiers, fighting soon spread to the strategic rn2, four civilians were killed and 40 were injured in the fighting. by 24 october fighting caused more than 23,000 people to flee their homes. [ 145 ] [ 146 ] the offensive continued along the rn2 highway leading to m23 capturing the towns of rubare, kalengera, and kako. [ 147 ] on 29 october m23 rebels took control of rutshuru and kiwanja . [ 148 ] around this time, allegedly rwandan-equipped nyatura rebels clashed with fdlr militants at in rugari. [ 38 ] in response to the offensive, the government of the drc ordered the rwandan ambassador to the country, vincent karega, to leave within the next 48 hours. [ 149 ] anti-rwandan protests broke out on 31 october in goma, demanding that the drc leave the east african community and that russia intervene in the conflict. government spokesman patrick muyaya said that the drc would not negotiate with m23. [ 150 ] on 2 november, kenya announced that it would send 900 soldiers to fight against the m23. [ 17 ] riots broke out in goma after rumors of the un transporting m23, and several un vehicles were burned by rioting civilians. the un accounted a "strategic and tactical withdrawal" from the rumangabo military base. [ 151 ] on 7 november, the congolese military stated they were training 3,000 new recruits to go and fight m23, [ 152 ] and soon after began to bomb the rebels with two fighter jets. rwanda protested that a congolese air force sukhoi su-25 had violated its airspace. [ 40 ] by 15 november 2022, m23 had pushed to the towns of rugari and tongo clashing with the fardc. a m23 attack on kibumba was initially repelled. as the insurgents advanced, hundreds of civilians fled. [ 153 ] by 17 november, m23 claimed to have captured the towns of kibumba, ruhunda, buhumba, kabuhanga, tongo, and mulimbi from the fdlr who they accuse of working with the congolese army. [ 154 ] the ugandan military said that they would participate in the fight against the m23 joining kenyan troops. [ 155 ] on 18 november, rwanda declared a ceasefire on behalf of the rebels. [ 156 ] by late november, the fardc had reportedly formed a coalition with several local militias, including fldr, mai-mai groups, and some nyatura factions. [ 22 ] a monusco investigation reported in december that massacres by the m23 in november killed at least 131 civilians in the rutshuru territory villages of bambo and kishishe . [ 157 ] the victims included 102 men, 17 women and 12 children, each of whom were "arbitrarily executed ... as part of reprisals against the civilian population" who were perceived to be aligned with the government. [ 157 ] on 23 december, m23 was forced by heavy international pressure to officially hand over kibumba to the eac regional force. despite this, their withdrawal was only partial; the insurgents maintained a presence in the town's outskirts. fardc declared the alleged handover of kibumba a "sham", intended to distract from m23's attempts to advance in other areas. [ 23 ] on 28 december 2022, south sudan sent a contingency of 750 troops to join the east african contingency to be stationed in goma . [ 18 ] over the next weeks, heavy fighting took place between m23 and a number of rival militias allied to fardc, including apcls which declared its aim to capture bwiza from the rebels. meanwhile, m23 captured several villages and the town of nyamilima near the ugandan border. [ 23 ] in january, clashes continued even as m23 declared its intention to surrender the rumangabo military base to the eac regional force. [ 23 ] on 18 january felix tshisekedi accused the m23 of not withdrawing from the seized territory as agreed. [ 158 ] on 24 january a congolese su-25 was damaged by ground fire from rwanda after rwanda said it violated its airspace. [ 159 ] on 27 january m23 captured the city of kitshanga causing people to flee and take refuge in the nearby un base. [ 160 ] kitshanga's capture cut off the road linking butembo , north kivu's second largest city, to goma. [ 161 ] after two days of heavy fighting, m23 seized the village of mushaki on 24 february, forcing civilians to flee and threatening supply routes to goma. [ 162 ] three days later m23 took the town of rubaya and its coltan mines . [ 163 ] the next day, the town of mweso also fell to the rebels. [ 164 ] in march, continued clashes caused 100,000 civilians to flee their homes. [ 165 ] further attempts to implement a ceasefire, including one organized by angola, had failed. however, m23 did withdraw from a few villages to hand them over to the eac regional force. [ 166 ] at this point, the insurgents controlled much of the land north of goma, while still advancing westward. [ 167 ] in late march and early april, m23 rebels vacated some villages, though also fought with a rival nyatura faction during this withdrawal. [ 168 ] m23 also kept attacking the fardc in other areas. [ 169 ] on 3 april, ugandan eac soldiers entered bunagana . however, instead of replacing the m23 occupation (as previously agreed), the peacekeepers coexisted with the rebels. [ 170 ] such an arrangement was also observed at rumangabo, where kenyans and m23 inhabited the same base, and along the sake-kilolirwe-kitshanga-mwesso axis, where burundian and rebel forces operated next to each other. [ 171 ] in addition, local sources suggested that m23 had begun to arm and train other militias. [ 170 ] on 10 april, m23 rebels completely retreated from the bwito chiefdom in rutshuru, allowing eac peacekeepers to move in. [ 172 ] on the other side, the insurgents fortified and reinforced their positions in kibumba, in one case in the direct vicinity to kenyan eac troops. [ 173 ] in october 2023, the drc ordered the eac force in the country to leave by 8 december, due to a "lack of satisfactory results on the ground". [ 174 ] on 26 october, the m23 rebels launched an offensive on bambo, seizing the town. [ 175 ] meanwhile, fighting continued to close in on the city of goma, with clashes taking place 20 kilometers from the city. [ 176 ] on 4 february 2024, m23 seized the town of shasha, severing a road linking goma to outside areas- m23 subsequently seized the towns of kihindo, kituva, bukobati, and nyamubingwa, and was in control of the goma- minova road by 5 february. the fighting caused many civilians and the congolese military to flee to the town of minova, and m23 ended up in control of all routes leading out of goma. [ 177 ] [ 178 ] the m23 rebels were advancing on the town of sake by 7 february, causing many in the town to flee to goma. [ 179 ] the town of sake had been heavily defended by the congolese government and the forces of monusco over the course of a year. [ 180 ] on 20 june, rwandan president paul kagame declared to france 24 , "we are ready to fight" against the drc if necessary, while evading questions about rwanda's military presence in the region. [ 181 ] in july 2024, a report commissioned by the un security council disclosed that between 3,000 and 4,000 rwandan military interventions and operations had been conducted in the nyiragongo , rutshuru , and masisi territories, collaborating with m23 rebels, with "kigali exercising significant control over the rebel group's operations." [ 66 ] [ 182 ] the report estimated that by april, the number of rwandan troops was "matching if not surpassing" the estimated 3,000 m23 soldiers. it includes authenticated photographs, drone footage, video recordings, testimonies, and intelligence substantiating the rdf's systematic border incursions. [ 66 ] the evidence depicts rows of armed personnel in uniform, operating equipment such as artillery, armored vehicles with radar and anti-aircraft missile systems, and troop transport trucks. [ 66 ] it also reveals that children as young as 12 were recruited from "nearly all refugee camps in rwanda" by intelligence officers through false promises of payment or employment, only to be sent to training camps in the rebel-controlled zone under the supervision of rwandan soldiers and m23 combatants. [ 66 ] on 5 august, nearly a hundred officers of the congolese national police fled to uganda as fighting between m23 and the congolese army intensified. [ 183 ] diplomatic efforts led by angolan president joão lourenço stalled after the rwandan delegation failed to attend a tripartite summit on 15 december in luanda, which was intended to discuss the neutralization of the fdlr alongside congolese president félix tshisekedi and president lourenço. [ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] rwanda's absence heightened suspicions that its involvement in the drc was driven primarily by economic interests, particularly access to the mineral resources in kivu, rather than security-related concerns. [ 72 ] [ 73 ] on 4 january, m23 seized masisi , a town with a population of 40,000 and the administrative seat of masisi territory . agence france-presse said that m23 forces had previously captured the katale area before entering masisi. [ 184 ] on 9 january, nobel laureate denis mukwege called for the international community to impose strong sanctions on rwanda, urging action beyond verbal condemnations. [ 185 ] the same day, m23 forces began moving toward rubaya , a key area for the extraction of coltan, a mineral vital to global technology supply chains. on 13 january, fardc reported successfully repelling an m23 offensive on its newly established positions in ngungu, in the mupfuni-shanga groupement . [ 186 ] [ 187 ] fardc conducted airstrikes in mbingi, a region it was expected to control but failed to maintain for more than a day due to reinforcements arriving for m23. [ 188 ] the following day, m23 fighters based in mulimbi launched an assault on the wazalendo stronghold in the lubwe sud urban area, within the tongo groupement of bwito chiefdom . during an ambush by wazalendo near kiseguro, located in the binza groupement in rutshuru territory, five members of the m23/rdf coalition were killed. [ 187 ] [ 189 ] m23 fighters were apprehended while looting agricultural products from farmers. [ 187 ] [ 189 ] explosions from both heavy and light weaponry echoed for several hours after the ambush, particularly in the localities of kiseguro and ngwenda, where wazalendo forces engaged in combat with m23 troops. [ 187 ] on the same day, m23 seized control of luofu, approximately 60 kilometers from lubero-center in lubero territory , which had been under fardc control for over two days. [ 188 ] humanitarian sources detailed accounts of atrocities, including the sexual assault of five young girls in kalungu, 15 kilometers south of minova in the buzi groupement , kalehe territory , and two additional women in bihovu, a locality within shanje in lowa-numbi village. [ 190 ] by 15 january, clashes between fardc and m23 rebels continued in alimbongo and luofu villages within lubero territory. [ 188 ] that day, wazalendo forces mounted another ambush in kihondo, located within the bwito chiefdom. the engagement resulted in nine civilian fatalities perpetrated by m23 combatants. [ 189 ] kihondo was subsequently occupied by fardc, while nyanzale was bifurcated—its southern region held by wazalendo and the northern portion controlled by the m23-rdf coalition. [ 189 ] on 16 january, three civilians were shot in masisi territory, with one dying instantly and two critically injured and hospitalized. [ 191 ] in ngungu, fardc forces regrouped and moved toward numbi in an attempt to reclaim the lost area. [ 191 ] on 17 january, one civilian was killed and two others injured by gunfire in masisi-center . that morning, m23 forces advanced toward kami-lwanguba, mashaki, kironge, and busekere, capturing a significant portion of buabo while moving toward kilambo. fardc forces remained positioned in luashi and around kahongole, near kahanga and kasura. meanwhile, wazalendo units were also present in buabo. [ 191 ] on 18 january, president félix tshisekedi reaffirmed kinshasa's refusal to engage in dialogue with m23, stating, "legitimizing these criminals would be an insult to the victims and to international law". [ 192 ] tshisekedi criticized kigali for its continued provocations, violations of agreements, and active support for m23, emphasizing that these actions compromised the credibility of the peace process outlined in the luanda agreement. [ 192 ] on 19 january, the m23-rdf coalition annexed the mineral-rich towns of lumbishi and changue in kalehe territory. [ 193 ] on 20 january, the coalition launched a series of bombings targeting hills overlooking sake in the kamuronza groupement of masisi territory, which targeted fardc and wazalendo positions, primarily affected the locality of kimoka near the lushagala displaced persons camp. despite the intensity of the attacks, the coalition was repelled. [ 193 ] however, later that evening, m23 forces captured minova after intense fighting in masisi territory. minova became the first significant urban center in south kivu to fall to m23. [ 194 ] the occupation exacerbated an already precarious humanitarian situation, inflating the prices of essential commodities and displacing thousands more. reports from the office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs (ocha) indicated that 178,079 internally displaced persons sought refuge across seven health areas surrounding minova, contributing to the swelling count of 700,000 displaced persons already registered in the buzi groupement . [ 190 ] by 21 january, rebel forces had deployed across multiple locations within the town, commandeering positions previously held by fardc and wazalendo forces. strategic vantage points such as katale, kachiazo, and the hills overlooking minova were occupied to ensure dominion over lake kivu . [ 194 ] m23 forces then moved toward kasunyu, a route leading to both goma and rwanda, effectively cutting off a critical supply route to goma. the rebels also advanced toward kalungu, located 7 kilometers from minova, with the potential to reach nyabibwe, another mining hub. the axis also pointed toward kavumu, home to a regional airport. [ 194 ] [ 195 ] bweremana was taken by m23 following an artillery assault against fardc forces. the situation rapidly escalated into a humanitarian crisis, compelling numerous residents to flee to safer locations, such as burora and nyamoma. [ 196 ] fardc announced that they are continuing their fight against the m23 rebels and rdf on multiple fronts in the eastern region of the country, asserting that they are containing "the enemy" in the areas of lubero, sake, and nyiragongo, while admitting to "breakthroughs" by m23 in bweremana and minova. [ 196 ] by 22 january, m23 had entrenched itself within minova and kalungu in the buzi groupement and expanded its dominion to makelele and butale in the mbinga-nord groupement . [ 197 ] ocha concurrently reported that the violence led to large-scale population displacement, with over 178,000 people newly displaced from bweremana, minova, and kalungu, and 125 injured people evacuated to goma for advanced medical care. meanwhile, actualite.cd reported that at least 18 civilians, predominantly farmers, lost their lives during m23's assault on bweremana and minova. [ 197 ] [ 198 ] goma experienced an electricity outage due to a snel ( société nationale d'électricité ) failure on the 70 kv high-voltage line linking bukavu to goma, with snel informing customers that the situation was "beyond its control". [ 199 ] south africa dispatched minister of defence and veterans affairs angie motshekga to the drc, facilitating an appraisal of the south african national defence force (sandf) contingent embedded within the sadc mission in the drc (samidrc) combatting m23. [ 200 ] on 23 january, intensified clashes erupted as the m23-rdf coalition launched a pre-dawn offensive against fardc and wazalendo positions near sake , encompassing strategic corridors such as the sake-kirotshe, sake-mushaki, and sake- kitshanga roads. [ 201 ] the sadc force, stationed in sake, sustained casualties, including seven fatalities among south african personnel and over ten injuries. [ 200 ] monusco mobilized reinforcements to fortify defenses around sake and goma but remained absent in minova due to mandate restrictions. [ 202 ] meanwhile, in nyiragongo territory , residents of rusayo in the mudja groupement reported incessant artillery and small arms fire. simultaneous attacks by m23-rdf forces targeted wazalendo and fardc positions in kilimanyoka and kanyamahoro, approximately 20 kilometers north of goma. [ 203 ] fardc and wazalendo successfully counterattacked, repelling m23 forces attempting to entrench themselves on nditi hill, near the virunga national park . two civilians died in a bombing incident in the turunga village by m23 and rdf coalition. [ 203 ] [ 204 ] in lubero territory , three civilians, including a woman and a child, were wounded when a bomb fired by m23 from the hills surrounding the town of alimbongo exploded in lubango, 45 kilometers away from lubero-centre . [ 205 ] in kalehe territory, two civilians were killed and several others wounded after m23's heavy bombing by sukhoi planes on nyundo hill in the chondo village. [ 206 ] on the morning of 24 january, around 4 a.m., m23 launched explosives at multiple fardc and wazalendo resistance positions, particularly targeting kanyamahoro, far from kibati, heading towards kibumba. [ 207 ] united nations secretary-general antónio guterres condemned the actions of m23, calling for an immediate cessation of their advance, the withdrawal from occupied territories, and adherence to the 31 july 2024 ceasefire agreement, stating, "all actors must uphold the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the drc and cease all forms of support to armed groups, whether domestic or foreign". [ 208 ] that evening, the military governor of north kivu, major general peter cirimwami nkuba , was shot at approximately 9:00 p.m. in sake. cirimwami was subsequently evacuated to kinshasa , where his death was confirmed. [ 209 ] five monusco peacekeepers sustained injuries, while four others had been wounded the previous day during combat in the same region. [ 210 ] cbca hospital in ndosho admitted over 256 wounded individuals, including 90 civilians with severe injuries from gunfire and shelling. [ 211 ] nicolas de rivière , france's ambassador to the un , reaffirmed france's support for the sovereignty and kinshasa's request for an emergency open session of the united nations security council . [ 212 ] turkish president recep tayyip erdoğan advocated for a peaceful resolution to the conflict, expressed support for angola's mediation efforts, and affirmed his readiness to support any initiative promoting peace in the african great lakes region. [ 212 ] the german foreign ministry urgently called for rwanda and m23 to immediately cease their military actions. [ 212 ] french politician jean-luc mélenchon accused rwanda of orchestrating an "invasion" of the drc, asserting, "rwanda is organizing the annexation of the neighboring province into congolese territory". [ 212 ] president joão lourenço condemned the occupation of sake and minova by the m23-rdf coalition, declaring, "these irresponsible actions by the m23 and its supporters are worsening the humanitarian situation, particularly around goma, and threatening regional security". [ 213 ] he assured the integrity and security of the troops of the enhanced ad hoc verification mechanism (mva-r) deployed in goma as part of regional peace initiatives. [ 213 ] on 25 january, fighting broke out between fardc supported by wazalendo and m23 supported by rdf advanced in the masisi territory's mweso axis in the bashali chiefdom and the sake axis in the bahunde chiefdom, with fardc and wazalendo attempting to repel m23 and the rdf coalition while trying to halt their advance toward goma, beginning the battle of the city on its outskirts. [ 214 ] in mweso, at least two civilians, a woman and a child, who had been shot, died from their injuries shortly after being admitted to mweso general referral hospital ( hôpital général de référence de mweso ). [ 214 ] three malawian defence force (mdf) soldiers, part of the regional mission samidrc, were killed in sake, [ 215 ] while nine sandf soldiers lost their lives after succeeding in halting the m23 advance toward goma and pushing the rebels back. [ 216 ] six un peacekeepers, from south africa and uruguay, were killed in m23 attacks. [ 11 ] [ 217 ] on 26 january at approximately 11:00 a.m., a bomb struck the rusayo 1 and rusayo 2 camps for displaced persons in nyiragongo territory, killing ten people, including women and children, while numerous injuries were reported. [ 218 ] on the same day, actualite.cd reported that over 90 war-wounded, primarily suffering gunshot wounds, from various locations in kalehe territory and others from goma hospital, had been receiving treatment by the icrc at the bukavu provincial general referral hospital ( hôpital général provincial de référence de bukavu ) since 1 january. [ 219 ] three sky news journalists, a reporter from radio france internationale / agence france-presse , and a journalist from sake fm were attacked in kihisi in nyiragongo territory while covering the dire situation of fleeing populations. [ 220 ] in response to these developments, congolese government spokesperson patrick muyaya katembwe criticized the african union commission for referring to m23 as a "political-military opposition", emphasizing that the group is a terrorist organization supported by rwanda. the government accused the african union of creating confusion and instead urged a stronger denunciation of m23's actions. [ 221 ] [ 222 ] on the same day, m23 deployed reinforcements around goma, advancing closer to the city and consolidating its strategic positions. [ 223 ] the united nations special representative in the drc, bintou keita , briefed the security council on the severity of the situation. she noted that m23 had doubled the territory under its control since 2012. [ 223 ] monusco expressed its readiness to assist the drc in filing a formal complaint with the international civil aviation organization (icao) over airspace violations involving m23, including incidents of gps jamming at the goma international airport . [ 224 ] amid the unrest, thunderous artillery blasts echoed throughout goma and nearby nyiragongo territory, halting daily activities as residents sheltered indoors. [ 225 ] in the mapendo neighborhood , opportunistic looters exploited the chaos to ransack businesses and deserted residences. [ 225 ] congolese authorities confirmed that the border crossing points with rwanda, including the small and large barriers, operated normally until their routine closure at 3:00 p.m. meanwhile, sporadic gunfire in nyiragongo territory continued to displace masses, as refugees from rutshuru fled to goma to escape the ongoing bombardments. [ 226 ] displacement camps in nyiragongo territory were targeted, with four bombs striking two locations, resulting in over ten fatalities, including women and children, and injuring numerous others. [ 226 ] fardc deployed tanks at strategic spots in goma, including the birere roundabout, and rotated troops to strengthen the northern front. at goma international airport, romanian military instructors coordinated with fardc forces and wazalendo units to bolster security amid rising tensions. [ 226 ] m23 issued an ultimatum demanding the surrender of fardc forces and imposing a 48-hour deadline, which led to some soldiers relinquishing their arms before the deadline expired. [ 227 ] goma's infrastructure faced severe challenges, including water and electricity outages, blocked roads, and persistent gps interference, which threatened both civilian and humanitarian air operations. [ 228 ] some residents fled to bukavu, using boats to cross the lake kivu. [ 226 ] early on 27 january, m23 announced on x that they had captured goma, although there were still reports of fighting throughout the city. [ 229 ] videos shared online showed m23 rebels patrolling the streets, and reports emerged of heavy shelling and a mass jailbreak from goma's prison, which housed 4,767 inmates and was reportedly set ablaze. [ 227 ] [ 230 ] it was later reported that hundreds of female inmates were raped and burned alive during the munzenze prison jailbreak. [ 231 ] m23 and rdf fighters advanced into strategic neighborhoods such as majengo, mabanga, and areas surrounding goma international airport. rva ( régie des voies aériennes ) personnel remained trapped at the airport. [ 232 ] looting erupted in neighborhoods like mapendo, majengo, and the office district. [ 232 ] patrick muyaya urged residents to remain indoors, avoid acts of vandalism and theft, and resist rwanda's alleged propaganda efforts. [ 233 ] civilians sought refuge in monusco bases, while local authorities, including the police mayor of goma, remained in the city. cross-border tensions escalated as stray gunfire reportedly struck gisenyi in rwanda, leading to five casualties. [ 234 ] rwanda deployed tanks along the border. [ 235 ] m23 forces solidified control over northern goma, with their visible activity in major neighborhoods signaling their tightening grip. [ 232 ] by mid-afternoon, mount goma—a strategic site hosting the provincial branch of radio-télévision nationale congolaise (rtnc)—fell under m23 control. [ 235 ] [ 236 ] a trainee doctor working in the maternity ward at the provincial hospital near mount goma was shot during crossfire. [ 237 ] the world food programme (wfp) suspended its activities, cutting off essential food aid to 800,000 people. [ 235 ] by 7:00 p.m. that evening, fardc reclaimed control of the rtnc station. [ 238 ] vital kamerhe , president of the national assembly , announced that fardc and wazalendo forces "continue to hold certain positions in the city". [ 239 ] on the same day, agence france-presse reported that the battle for goma resulted in at least 17 fatalities and 367 injuries. [ 240 ] on 28 january large-scale civil unrest erupted in kinshasa during the morning hours, as crowds gathered outside embassies, including those of kenya, the us, belgium, rwanda, the netherlands, uganda, and france, demanding stronger international action and the immediate withdrawal of the m23-rdf coalition. [ 241 ] [ 242 ] [ 243 ] [ 244 ] outside the u.s. embassy, demonstrators torched tires and criticized western nations for their perceived indifference, advocating instead for intensified russian involvement. [ 241 ] outside the kenyan embassy, tensions escalated into property damage, looting, and break-ins, prompting the evacuation of two diplomatic personnel. [ 243 ] congolese security forces quickly intervened, setting up security cordons around the embassies. congolese foreign minister thérèse kayikwamba wagner expressed remorse, affirming that measures were underway to restore order and assess damages. [ 243 ] amidst the mounting unrest, sandf responded to a video alleging its troops had surrendered to m23 rebels, clarifying that the white flag shown signified a temporary agreement with the m23 to recover casualties and provide medical assistance, rather than a surrender. [ 241 ] south africa confirmed that four additional sandf soldiers had been killed, bringing the total number of south african peacekeepers killed since the conflict escalated to 13. [ 245 ] meanwhile, the icrc reported an attack and looting of one of its warehouses in goma and noted the worsening security situation in sake, while its medical personnel at ndosho hospital in goma faced an overwhelming influx of casualties, treating 198 patients despite the facility's original capacity of 147 beds. [ 246 ] in response to the crisis, germany suspended planned development aid negotiations with rwanda, calling for an immediate withdrawal of m23-rdf forces from congolese territory. [ 247 ] that evening, brigadier general evariste somo kakule was elevated to the rank of major general and appointed as the new military governor of north kivu. [ 248 ] at dawn on 29 january, the m23-rdf coalition commenced an incursion into kalehe territory , launching coordinated offensives on kiniezire and mukwidja in kalehe district capturing the towns. [ 249 ] in kiniezire, intense skirmishes erupted between the coalition and fardc-wazalendo forces, whereas mukwidja was seized without resistance. [ 250 ] later that evening, prolonged firefights and bombings were reported in turunga village within the munigi groupement of the bukumu chiefdom , while movements of wazalendo and other militant factions from goma toward the chiefdom's mudja groupement had been reported since the preceding day, accompanied by sporadic gunfire. [ 251 ] during the same timeframe, over 300 men—allegedly " romanian mercenaries" hired by the drc to counter the rebel offensive—surrendered to m23 forces and, bereft of an alternative escape route, eventually handed themselves over to munusco peacekeeping units in goma, who arranged for their repatriation via kigali , rwanda. [ 252 ] [ 253 ] [ 254 ] president cyril ramaphosa paid tribute to the 13 sandf soldiers killed in the conflict, explicitly blaming m23 and "rwandan army militias" for the clashes involving fardc and samidrc. [ 255 ] he also stressed that south africa's mission in the drc "is not a declaration of war against any country or state". [ 255 ] in response, president paul kagame cautioned that "south africa is not positioned to act as a mediator or peacemaker", warning against direct confrontation, stating that "if south africa prefers confrontation, rwanda will address the matter as such at any time". [ 255 ] meanwhile, president félix tshisekedi called for a national mobilization, urging citizens to rally behind fardc against what he called "rwanda's barbaric aggression". [ 256 ] the next day, on 30 january at around 5:00 a.m., the m23-rdf coalition, having advanced from mukwidja, confronted fardc troops in kalangala village. the village, strategically positioned between mukwidja and nyabibwe, lies 6 km from mukwidja and 56 km from the administrative town of kalehe. [ 257 ] that evening, the country's electoral commission, ceni , revealed that between 28 and 29 january, the coalition had transported election-related materials—including vehicles, motorcycles, and electoral kits—from goma to rwanda and had detained several officials from north kivu's ceni provincial executive secretariat. [ 258 ] concurrently, agence france-presse reported an alarming escalation in the death toll, reporting that "more than 100 people" had been killed, nearly a thousand wounded, and upwards of 500,000 civilians forcibly displaced since the onset of january. [ 259 ] meanwhile, la croix affirmed that the m23-rdf coalition had commandeered goma international airport and had asserted near-total control over the city. [ 260 ] the united nations humanitarian coordinator in the drc, bruno lemarquis, issued an urgent plea for the immediate reinstatement of airport operations, cautioning that its prolonged closure or restricted accessibility would severely hinder humanitarian relief efforts. [ 261 ] simultaneously, deputy prime minister guy kabombo muadiamvita declared that fardc would not retreat or engage in talks near kigali, stating, "we will stand and fight; there will be no other withdrawal". [ 262 ] on 31 january, at approximately 1:00 p.m., fardc launched a counteroffensive, reclaiming mukwidja, sanzi, muganzo, and adjacent localities. [ 263 ] clashes persisted in ukana and nyamigisha, while lieutenant jérémie meya gbe, spokesperson for fardc's sukola north - south kivu military campaign, confirmed that clashes had spread beyond nyabibwe. [ 263 ] fardc intensified efforts to thwart further m23 incursions toward bukavu , the provincial capital of south kivu . that evening, authorities in bukavu inaugurated a recruitment initiative for volunteers willing to enlist in the battle against m23. [ 264 ] many youths expressed readiness to enlist with the wazalendo militia to defend national sovereignty against what was described as "rwandan aggression". [ 264 ] updf announced its intent to "strengthen its defenses" in eastern drc. [ 265 ] meanwhile, united nations secretary-general spokesperson stéphane dujarric provided an alarming update on the humanitarian crisis, disclosing that "more than 700 people" had been killed and 2,800 wounded within a mere five-day span of intensified conflict, with casualty figures based on assessments conducted collaboratively by the world health organization (who), its affiliated partners, and the congolese government between 26 and 30 january. [ 266 ] [ 267 ] on 1 february, colonel alexis rugabisha, commander of fardc's 12th brigade, was killed in combat against m23-rdf forces on the kanyanja axis near kiniezire, after leading a counteroffensive that successfully expelled m23 militants from nyabibwe toward the periphery of minova, before ultimately succumbing to battlefield injuries. [ 268 ] [ 269 ] [ 270 ] that same day, eac convened a virtual summit, chaired by president william ruto, calling for an "immediate and unconditional" ceasefire in eastern drc and urging kinshasa to engage in direct dialogue with all stakeholders, including m23. [ 271 ] while president paul kagame participated in the summit, his congolese counterpart, félix tshisekedi, abstained, with his office citing scheduling constraints. [ 271 ] muyaya dismissed the eac's stance, asserting that the regional bloc was failing to acknowledge rwanda's role in the conflict. [ 271 ] muyaya questioned why rwanda had not been asked to engage in dialogue with fdlr if they truly sought a peaceful resolution. [ 271 ] the following day, the tanzanian people's defence force (tpdf) announced that two of its soldiers had been killed and four others wounded in clashes with the m23-rdf coalition between 24 and 28 january in sake and goma. [ 272 ] on 3 february, m23 announced a unilateral ceasefire but warned that it would continue to defend its positions if attacked. [ 269 ] [ 270 ] despite this announcement, reports indicated that m23 was reinforcing its positions with additional troops and equipment in kalehe territory. [ 269 ] [ 270 ] fardc forces subsequently retook mambasa, the capital of bamate chiefdom in lubero territory , forcing m23 to retreat to the village of nduta near alimbongo. [ 273 ] meanwhile, protests erupted in butembo , where residents organized two marches—one covering 19 kilometers to musienene and another spanning 45 kilometers to lubero-center —in support of fardc and in opposition to m23's presence in the region. [ 273 ] casualties mounted, with the united nations office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs (ocha) reporting a staggering toll of at least 900 fatalities and approximately 2,880 injuries. [ 274 ] in response to the worsening security situation, congolese ministers jean-pierre bemba and ève bazaiba traveled to kisangani , where they gathered several hundred young volunteers to enlist in fardc's ranks. [ 275 ] meanwhile, president cyril ramaphosa called for the cessation of m23's territorial expansion and the immediate withdrawal of all foreign military forces from congolese territory. [ 276 ] on 4 february, deputy administrator of kalehe territory, archimède karhebwa, reported that m23-rdf forces had advanced into nyamasasa and engaged in further clashes with fardc. [ 269 ] [ 270 ] while he stated that bukavu remained "spared from immediate danger", rebel forces continued their progression, capturing murambi and kabugizi villages before moving into luhefu and kisale. [ 270 ] in mukwija, m23 reportedly forced catholic priests to vacate a local convent before consolidating their presence in the area. [ 270 ] meanwhile, european council president antónio costa revealed that he had held discussions with both president tshisekedi and president kagame regarding the crisis. [ 277 ] costa expressed optimism that constructive talks would occur in dar es salaam under the auspices of the sadc and the eac during the forthcoming international conference on the great lakes region (icglr), scheduled to convene on 7 and 8 february. [ 277 ] on 5 february, m23-rdf forces mounted an offensive against nyabibwe, a strategic locality positioned along national road no. 2 leading to bukavu. fighting erupted around 3:00 a.m., with the rebels breaching fardc's defensive lines on the nyanganwa-chanjé axis. [ 278 ] within hours, m23 secured nyabibwe, establishing a foothold in the area by midday and preparing to advance toward kalehe-ihusi. [ 278 ] fardc's military justice system issued an arrest warrant against corneille nangaa , accusing him of failing to prevent or suppress acts of torture committed under his authority. [ 279 ] an official directive mandated nangaa's immediate arrest and transfer to congolese authorities for prosecution. [ 279 ] that same day the head of the un peacekeeping force based in goma, vivian van de perre , said m23 may have had a sudden rethink after 2,000 extra reinforcements from burundi arrived in bukavu and a nearby airport was used by the congolese air force. [ 231 ] on 6 february, m23 rebels were halted in bushushu village of kalehe territory after capturing nyamukubi and lushebere. [ 280 ] on 7 february, the fonds de promotion de l'industrie (fpi) reported that its facilities in goma had been looted by m23-rdf forces. [ 281 ] the perpetrators forced entry, absconding with a secure vault containing $7,500 and 4 million congolese francs , alongside an fpi transport vehicle, with the misappropriated assets purportedly transported into rwanda. [ 281 ] two vehicles belonging to the caisse nationale de sécurité sociale (cnss) were commandeered. the fpi also noted that numerous executives of state-owned enterprises had gone into hiding due to mounting threats to their safety. [ 281 ] on 8 february, the economic community of central african states (eccas) denounced m23 and rdf, demanding an immediate cessation of hostilities, a full withdrawal from unlawfully occupied territories, and adherence to established humanitarian corridor agreements. [ 282 ] that same day, m23 launched a bombing attack in ndoluma, near the lubero front line, killing 14 people, including civilians. [ 283 ] a sadc-eac summit convened, attended by regional leaders, where president tshisekedi participated via videoconference from the african union city in kinshasa. [ 284 ] the drc delegation called for rwanda's condemnation, the withdrawal of its troops, and the reopening of goma international airport to facilitate humanitarian aid. [ 285 ] the summit mandated the eac-sadc chiefs of defence forces to convene within five days to provide technical guidance on enforcing a ceasefire, facilitating humanitarian assistance, securing goma and its surroundings, reopening critical supply routes, and ensuring safe navigation on lake kivu. [ 286 ] it also ordered a joint ministerial meeting to be held within 30 days to evaluate military measures, implement a coordination framework, and allocate financial resources for ongoing security interventions, [ 287 ] and reaffirmed the merger of the luanda and nairobi peace efforts into a unified framework. [ 288 ] president ramaphosa endorsed the summit's resolutions, emphasizing that they would pave the way for the withdrawal of samidrc troops. [ 289 ] on 10 february, congolese deputy minister of national defense and veterans , guy kabombo muadiamvita , visited beni , where he led a security council meeting and addressed fardc troops stationed on the front lines. [ 290 ] that evening, m23 launched a bomb attack in ndoluma, lubero , killing a civilian and several fardc soldiers. [ 291 ] the following day, at approximately 1:00 a.m., unidentified armed men assassinated chief prosper kimanuka musakura and his three children in kiziba ii, a village in the mudja groupement of bukumu chiefdom , which had been under m23-rdf control since late january. [ 292 ] [ 293 ] later that afternoon, m23-rdf forces launched artillery strikes on fardc positions in kivisire, situated 15 kilometers from mambasa. [ 291 ] the same day, ocha reported that since 29 january, about 30,000 people had fled villages along the minova coast, relocating to idjwi territory , kalehe center, katana, kavumu, mudaka, and bukavu, while others moved to bunyakiri , west of kalehe center, and kalungu, to the north. [ 294 ] ocha also documented severe human rights abuses, including sexual violence and looting, particularly in ihusi. [ 294 ] in goma, many displaced persons faced difficulties returning home due to restrictions on crossing lake kivu between nzulo (north kivu) and bugulube (south kivu). [ 294 ] on 12 february, m23 recaptured kalehe center and ihusi after heavy clashes with fardc, forcing government troops to withdraw to avert encirclement. the rebels advanced further toward chibanda, kasheke , and kabamba, consolidating control over much of kalehe territory's coastal areas, from minova to kalehe center. [ 295 ] the high plateau region, including buloho chiefdom, remained under fardc control. [ 295 ] meanwhile, in goma, three suspected armed bandits were burned alive by civilians following accusations of murder. [ 296 ] on 13 february, m23 forces moved into chofi, five kilometers from kalehe center, and clashed with fardc in luzira and kasheke in kabare territory . [ 297 ] simultaneously, fighting erupted in kivisire, about ten kilometers from mambasa. [ 298 ] that same day, revolutionary goma-based musician delphin katembo vinywasiki, known as delcat idengo , was assassinated—allegedly targeted for opposing m23 after escaping munzenze prison when goma fell to the rebels in late january. [ 299 ] [ 300 ] [ 301 ] [ 302 ] [ 303 ] the european parliament urged rwanda to withdraw its troops from the drc and called for a suspension of the eu-rwanda memorandum of understanding on sustainable raw materials value chains, citing concerns over rwanda's alleged mineral exploitation in m23-controlled areas, and recommended freezing budgetary support to rwanda until it ceases its interference in the conflict. [ 304 ] in a bid to de-escalate tensions, a delegation from the conférence épiscopale nationale du congo (cenco) and église du christ au congo (ecc) visited kagame in kigali as part of a broader initiative for regional peace. [ 305 ] prior to this meeting, the delegation held discussions in kinshasa with tshisekedi and other political figures, including vital kamerhe and martin fayulu . they also met with nangaa in goma the preceding day, advocating for an immediate ceasefire, the reopening of goma's airport and port, and the establishment of a humanitarian corridor. [ 305 ] on 14 february, m23 occupied kalehe and kabare territories, seizing kabamba and katana. fighting in kabamba, a locality bordering kalehe territory, lasted through the night before the congolese army withdrew to katana around 9:00 a.m. [ 306 ] m23 then advanced toward kavumu, forcing fardc to retreat to kavumu airport . [ 306 ] as a result, many civilians fled to bukavu , while others remained trapped in their homes as clashes continued. [ 307 ] [ 306 ] human rights watch urged the african union (au) to take decisive action and support the united nations human rights council resolution on the drc. [ 308 ] by midday, m23 had successfully overrun kavumu airport, approximately 30 kilometers from bukavu, despite continued resistance from fardc. [ 307 ] civilian movement remained restricted, with some venturing onto the streets despite ongoing insecurity. [ 307 ] later that day, m23 reportedly entered bukavu itself, [ 309 ] where widespread looting occurred, particularly in the industrial zone, affecting datco, pharmakina, and wfp facilities. [ 310 ] it was later reported that m23 executed a significant number of children during the occupation, though the precise number of casualties remained unverified. [ 311 ] [ 312 ] [ 313 ] amid the ongoing conflict, the bukavu high court sentenced 212 soldiers to death, convicting them of murder, attempted murder, sexual violence, and dereliction of duty in the face of the adversary during the m23 incursion. [ 314 ] an additional 70 soldiers were acquitted and released. meanwhile, in munich , tshisekedi, attending the security conference, excoriated rwanda for what he called a "disguised aggression" against the drc, asserting that "the m23 is a screen behind which the rwandan army hides" and accused former president joseph kabila of being "the real sponsor" behind the rebellion, alleging that he had formed an alliance with kigali to destabilize the nation. [ 315 ] the eu expressed concern over the continued advance of the alliance fleuve congo (afc)-m23 coalition in bukavu, warning that violations of the drc's territorial integrity would not go unanswered. [ 316 ] icrc reported increased casualties following m23's advance into bukavu, with sporadic gunfire and looting recorded. [ 317 ] two fatalities and fourteen injured people were admitted to hôpital provincial général de référence de bukavu (hpgrb). [ 317 ] on 15 february, sporadic gunfire and widespread looting persisted in bukavu, though m23 did not advance beyond kavumu airport. [ 318 ] that evening, m23 convened a meeting in miti, approximately 27 kilometers from bukavu. [ 318 ] fardc troops were sporadically sighted in certain neighborhoods, though their strategic positioning remained uncertain. [ 318 ] french president emmanuel macron called for m23's "immediate withdrawal" from bukavu and kavumu airport following discussions with tshisekedi. [ 319 ] france concurrently signaled its willingness to impose new multilateral sanctions on actors contributing to the armed conflict. [ 320 ] belgium followed suit, condemning the m23-rdf offensive and demanding the rebels' immediate withdrawal. [ 319 ] that night, fardc and wazalendo forces regained near-total control of the city, forcing m23 to retreat in large numbers. [ 321 ] on 16 february, a resurgent m23-afc and rdf force re-entered bukavu around 6:00 a.m., positioning themselves in key locations, including independence square ( place de l'indépendance ). [ 322 ] [ 323 ] m23's deputy coordinator, bertrand bisimwa , officially announced on x the group's entry into bukavu. [ 322 ] demonstrations erupted across the city, including outside the governorate , as residents cautiously emerged from their homes. [ 323 ] some attempted to attend places of worship despite widespread power outages affecting parts of the city. [ 323 ] the congolese government issued an advisory urging residents to remain indoors to avoid potential harm and assured citizens that efforts were underway to restore order and national sovereignty. [ 324 ] the united kingdom condemned the rebels' advance, calling for an immediate ceasefire, while international organizations—including the united nations and various humanitarian agencies—called for urgent intervention to forestall a large-scale humanitarian crisis. [ 325 ] the following day, bukavu was eerily quiet, described as a "ghost town" with economic activities at a halt. streets were strewn with debris as residents cautiously assessed the aftermath and sought to resume normal life. [ 326 ] meanwhile, burundian authorities reported that approximately 10,000 congolese refugees had entered the country, with some crossing via gatumba and others navigating the ruzizi river into bubanza and cibitoke provinces. [ 327 ] by 18 february, the humanitarian situation worsened, as the red cross of the drc reported 26 deaths and disclosed that between 14 and 17 february, the hpgrb had received 39 individuals wounded by firearm projectiles. [ 328 ] [ 329 ] the number of wounded swiftly escalated to 176. [ 330 ] the ohchr estimated that approximately 330,000 children had been forced out of school, with many at risk of never returning. [ 331 ] the ferry service between bukavu and goma, which had been suspended by m23 at the end of january 2025, was reinstated at 6:00 a.m., which allowed the evacuation of diverse groups of civilians from the embattled city. [ 332 ] concurrently, at approximately 4:00 a.m., m23 and rdf forces initiated renewed offensives in lubero , launching assaults on fardc's entrenched positions along the strategic highlands of vutsorovya, alimbongo, tchulo, and mambasa, which flank national road 2 en route to butembo . [ 333 ] intense fighting persisted throughout the afternoon, with heavy and light artillery fire engulfing multiple villages, including lubango, kipese, and kitsombiro—an important fardc rear base. [ 333 ] the skirmishes induced large-scale civilian displacement, with many residents fleeing toward butembo via lubero. others who had initially sought refuge in lubango and kipese continued their journey toward butembo. [ 333 ] at the lubero front, the clashes unfolded approximately 40 kilometers from lubero, where the ugandan army maintains a major base in mulo as part of joint operations against the allied democratic forces (adf). [ 333 ] in masisi territory , recurrent armed engagements between wazalendo and m23 were reported, particularly in mweso. masisi and mweso's health zones were among the hardest hit, with masisi's general reference hospital coming under gunfire since 16 february, injuring a ministry of public health employee. [ 334 ] by the later part of 18 february, m23-rdf forces had seized control of ndoluma, a locality known for its livestock husbandry, after intense fighting led to the withdrawal of fardc from mutongo, mambasa and kanyambi. [ 335 ] ndoluma's telecommunications infrastructure was also damaged. [ 335 ] meanwhile, in the kamanyola groupement , m23 took control following clashes with the burundian national defence force (fdnb), while fardc retreated to uvira —a border city situated 75 kilometers away along the periphery of lake tanganyika , adjacent to burundi. [ 336 ] the kamanyola's takeover led to a new wave of displacement, leaving only 20% of the local population behind. [ 336 ] belgium reassessed its diplomatic and developmental cooperation with rwanda and initiated the suspension of bilateral financial assistance. [ 337 ] in retaliation, rwanda unilaterally abrogated the 2024–2029 bilateral aid agreement with belgium, denouncing brussels for allegedly conspiring with kinshasa to hinder its access to international development financing. [ 337 ] meanwhile, the united kingdom summoned the rwandan high commissioner following m23's territorial advances. [ 338 ] concurrently, updf contingents deployed under the auspices of operation shujaa —a joint military effort with fardc against adf in beni and irumu territories—arrived in bunia and established its headquarters at the rwampara military center, southeast of bunia, within the tséré groupement of irumu territory. [ 339 ] this deployment became controversial due to inflammatory pronouncements by the ugandan chief of defence forces muhoozi kainerugaba , a known sympathizer of m23. [ 339 ] days before the deployment, kainerugaba issued "threatening" messages via x, vowing that updf forces would advance into bunia to combat codeco in djugu territory and issued an ultimatum, warning that all armed factions operating within bunia had 24 hours to surrender, failing which they would be considered enemies and subjected to updf military action. [ 339 ] as m23 troops advanced toward uvira , reports surfaced of armed altercations between fardc and wazalendo from 18 february into the early hours of 19 february, resulting in at least 17 fatalities. [ 340 ] [ 341 ] wazalendo fighters blocked fardc units from retreating to kalemie with weapons and ammunition, demanding full disarmament and summarily executing those who defied the directive. [ 340 ] escaping soldiers turned on civilians, looting homes, stealing valuables, and causing destruction. those who attempted to resist were met with lethal force. [ 340 ] more than 500 detainees, including civilian and military prisoners, escaped from mulunge prison in uvira. [ 342 ] a widely circulated video on social media showed hundreds of fardc soldiers boarding a boat at kalundu port in uvira en route to kalemie. [ 340 ] médecins sans frontières (msf) reported receiving a large number of injured people while simultaneously dealing with widespread looting, which hampered emergency medical response, including ambulance services. [ 341 ] the violence led to the shutdown of banks, pharmacies, markets, and medical facilities. [ 343 ] civilians fled in all directions, with some escaping into burundi, others seeking refuge in remote plateaus, and many heading toward kalemie and moba , [ 340 ] while political and administrative officials, along with a large portion of the police and military personnel, fled to neighboring areas such as burundi, kalemie, and tanzania. [ 343 ] meanwhile, afc-m23, captured sange in bafuliiru chiefdom , with rebel convoys advancing along national road 5 (rn5), approximately 35 kilometers from uvira. [ 344 ] residents, fearing potential violence, fled into the mountains. [ 344 ] in lubero, afc-m23 secured kitsombiro by approximately 9:00 a.m., following intense clashes that had earlier led to the fall of ndoluma. fardc regrouped at katondi, 5 kilometers north of kitsombiro, establishing defensive lines with the intent of launching a counteroffensive. [ 345 ] fighting between fardc and m23 persisted between katondi and kitsombiro, with reports suggesting that attempted to displace m23 toward the outskirts. despite these efforts, m23 retained its dominance over the battlefield as night approached. [ 345 ] in fizi territory , michel rukunda, alias makanika, a twirwaneho militia leader aligned with m23 and afc, was killed in minembwe by a congolese military drone. [ 346 ] [ 1 ] the congolese government accused rwanda of trying to overthrow tshisekedi, while kayikwamba called the un to implement "robust sanctions" against rwanda and the afc-m23 rebel faction. [ 347 ] meanwhile, a facebook post widely shared on social media reported clandestine m23 recruitment operations in kisangani . [ 348 ] in response, major general timothée mujinga, commander of the 31st military region, dismissed these claims as "unfounded rumors" and "false information", affirming that the congolese national police (pnc) and fardc remained fully operational to safeguard civilian security and property. [ 348 ] on 20 february, multiple fardc battalions were observed moving through uvira from the ruzizi plain toward kalundu port, ostensibly preparing to embark for kalemie. [ 349 ] within uvira, segments of the city remained under wazalendo dominion, while most residents remained sequestered in their homes. [ 349 ] in lubero territory , m23 rebels attempted an offensive but were pushed back by fardc forces in katondi, forcing them to retreat to the outskirts without being fully dislodged. [ 350 ] unable to engage on national road no. 2 , they took an alternate route through kasima, arriving in kipese by nightfall, which serves as a gateway to butembo. [ 351 ] in walungu territory , m23 rebels advanced toward the administrative center of walungu from cisheke and kashanja. [ 352 ] simultaneously, in masisi , an msf employee was wounded when gunfire struck the organization's base. [ 353 ] that same day, the united states sanctioned rwandan general james kabarebe and m23 spokesman laurence kanyuka. [ 354 ] during the g20 foreign ministers' meeting in south africa, british foreign secretary david lammy condemned rwanda's military operations in the drc and warned of potential diplomatic repercussions if rwanda continued to violate congolese territorial integrity. [ 355 ] on 21 february, looting incidents were reported in combat zones around butembo, particularly along the lubero front, where m23 and fardc forces had engaged in successive clashes. [ 356 ] some retreating fardc soldiers were accused of ransacking properties in villages they passed through. [ 356 ] that day, twirwaneho captured minembwe and its airfield . [ 1 ] the unsc unanimously adopted resolution 2773 demanding that m23 rebels immediately cease their offensive. the resolution, spearheaded by france's permanent representative to the un, also called upon rwandan forces to halt their support for the m23 insurgency and withdraw from congolese territory. [ 357 ] [ 358 ] [ 359 ] on 23 february 2025, burundian president évariste ndayishimiye met with tshisekedi at n'djili international airport in kinshasa for a private discussion. no official statement was issued following their exchange. [ 360 ] on the same day, m23 and rdf forces killed over a dozen civilians in goma. [ 361 ] despite launching a new offensive in kasinjwe, behind kipese toward masereka, m23 forces were repelled by fardc and wazalendo units stationed in masereka. the frontline remained unchanged, with m23 forces holding kipese and kitsombiro, while fardc maintained control over routes leading to lubero and lukanga, key pathways to butembo. [ 362 ] on 24 february, at a high-level session of the united nations human rights council in geneva, suminwa accentuated the escalating death toll, stating that more than 7,000 people had been killed since january and that approximately 450,000 people were left homeless following the destruction of 90 displacement camps. [ 363 ] [ 364 ] [ 365 ] the drc also welcomed resolution 2773, [ 366 ] and on that day, the european union suspended defense consultations with rwanda and initiated a review of its memorandum of understanding on strategic raw materials, citing concerns over rwanda's involvement in the conflict, [ 367 ] although a second wave of sanctions was blocked by luxembourg 's veto . [ 368 ] the uk also took measures, announcing a £14.6 million aid package for conflict-affected populations in eastern drc while freezing bilateral aid to rwanda, except for humanitarian aid . [ 369 ] [ 370 ] the uk further suspended military training assistance to the rdf and initiated a review of export licenses for military equipment intended for rwanda. british officials urged the drc to consider an inclusive dialogue involving the m23, a proposal firmly rejected by the congolese government. [ 369 ] [ 370 ] on 25 february, fighting in uvira between fardc and wazalendo left 20 dead and 60 injured, [ 371 ] while sandf disclosed that military personnel wounded in late january skirmishes with m23 in goma had been medically evacuated to south africa for treatment, though the exact number was undisclosed. sandf units under the samirdc framework maintained their operational presence in goma. [ 372 ] simultaneously, msf reported that between 19 and 20 february, 34 out of 47 healthcare facilities across north kivu had suffered varying degrees of operational incapacitation due to the incessant violence, with goma's main hospitals overwhelmed by an influx of casualties. [ 373 ] in mwenga territory , fardc and wazalendo battled twirwaneho forces, now under the command of charles sematama, whose alliance with burundian tutsi red-tabara rebels enabled them to seize mikenge. [ 374 ] in sange , fardc and wazalendo clashed over mugenyi ii, resulting in seven deaths as fardc attempted to reoccupy a former monusco base after withdrawing to uvira amid the m23 advance. [ 375 ] in rutshuru territory , three civilians were killed in kibirizi, bwito chiefdom , by m23 and afc forces. [ 376 ] on 26 february, reports emerged of forced recruitment efforts by afc-m23 forces targeting finalist and pre-finalist students in kamanyola, goma, and nyiragongo territory. fearing conscription, many parents removed their children from schools, while others attempted to flee the affected areas. [ 377 ] within nyiragongo territory, on the periphery of goma, at least fifteen people died in an inferno that erupted during an m23-rdf operation near don bosco ngangi, while at least five other civilians were shot in their homes during the incursion. [ 378 ] in uvira, fardc's operation sukola 2 in south kivu was launched to track down deserters and soldiers accused of harassment and misconduct amid the ongoing conflict. [ 379 ] meanwhile, in kalehe territory , two village chiefs were assassinated during the night of 25–26 february: joseph birikunguba bitamenyeka kanyere, the chief of batayo village, was murdered in mulunguzi—an area under wazalendo control—while bahati cirhahola jackson, the chief of the sub-village of nyamutwe in kasheke, was executed in an m23-controlled zone. [ 380 ] on 27 february, multiple explosions occurred during an m23-afc meeting at place de l'indépendance in bukavu as nangaa was concluding a high-profile session, resulting in at least 13 fatalities and 70 injuries. [ 381 ] [ 382 ] [ 383 ] m23's official casualty figures reported 11 deaths and 65 injuries. [ 384 ] tshisekedi denounced the attack, labeling it a "heinous terrorist act" and attributing culpability to "a foreign army illegally present on congolese soil", albeit without explicitly identifying rwanda or the m23-afc alliance. [ 385 ] meanwhile, m23 denied responsibility for the attack and accused the congolese government of orchestrating the attack. [ 384 ] reports also emerged from the groupe de travail thématique mines et hydrocarbures (gttmh) of south kivu's civil society, alleging that m23-afc forces looted the cjx minerals processing entity on the night of 19–20 february. [ 386 ] the group reported that m23-afc troops abducted security personnel, disabled surveillance cameras, and facilitated the transfer of mineral resources to rwanda for sale to companies such as traxys and sunrise. [ 386 ] the swedish ministry of foreign affairs summoned the rwandan ambassador to demand clarification on rwanda's involvement in the conflict, [ 387 ] and un peacekeeping officials visited kinshasa to discuss the implementation of resolution 2773. [ 388 ] on 28 february, luxembourg's foreign minister xavier bettel explained his veto of a second wave of eu sanctions, emphasizing that a sustainable political solution, mediated by local and regional actors, was essential for resolving the crisis. [ 368 ] bettel further stated that should the joint sadc-eac ministerial meeting scheduled for harare yield no progress, the eu would contemplate additional sanctions targeting rwanda. [ 368 ] on 1 march, an alliance comprising twirwaneho, red-tabara, and the android coalition, allied with m23, attacked wazalendo positions in bilalombili village near mikenge, where displaced populations from mikenge and surrounding areas had sought refuge. [ 389 ] several houses were burned, though the extent of the damage was not immediately clear. [ 389 ] in walungu territory, m23 advanced to bwahungu and muzinzi after capturing walungu center and kashanja, following battles against fardc and wazalendo forces. [ 390 ] on the same day, m23-afc claimed to have handed over a group of fdlr fighters to the rdf at the grande barrière border post in rubavu district . [ 391 ] fardc's spokesperson major general sylvain ekenge dismissed this claim, describing it as a fabricated plot aimed at discrediting the fardc and sadc forces. [ 391 ] ekenge argued that the detainees had been presented by rwandan media on 22 january 2025, accusing rwanda of faking their capture to justify military action in eastern drc and further stating that these fdlr detainees had been held at gitarama central prison in rwanda and dressed in new fardc military uniforms from the depot to mislead the public into believing they had been captured in goma. [ 391 ] [ 392 ] [ 393 ] on 3 march, canada suspended export permits, government-to-government business pursuits, private-sector support, and participation in international events hosted by rwanda or proposed by kigali. [ 394 ] [ 395 ] it also pledged 15 million canadian dollars in humanitarian aid for crisis-affected populations in the drc. [ 394 ] [ 395 ] that same day, the ohchr reported that m23 rebels had abducted at least 130 sick and wounded people from cbca ndosho hospital and heal africa hospital in goma—116 from cbca and an additional 15 from heal africa. [ 396 ] [ 397 ] germany similarly suspended new development aid to rwanda and initiated a reassessment of its extant financial commitments. [ 398 ] [ 399 ] [ 400 ] on 5 march, heavy fighting in mikenge saw wazalendo forces, led by kakobanya nakalambi, reclaim the village from m23-allied militias twirwaneho, red-tabara, and android, forcing their retreat to kalinga, six kilometers away in mwenga territory. [ 401 ] that same day, during a public speech in kikwit , congolese deputy prime minister of transport and communication channels , jean-pierre bemba , called on congolese youth to join fardc in defending the country "against its aggressors" and accused joseph kabila of backing m23, the afc, and the mobondo militia, which was engaged in conflicts in western drc . [ 402 ] [ 403 ] meanwhile, the scheduled sadc-eac ministerial meeting in harare was postponed indefinitely. [ 404 ] on the night of 7 march, after five days of occupation, m23 fighters withdrew from kasugho, located at the foot of the tayna gorilla reserve, 45 kilometers west of lubero , and moved toward bunyatenge, a gold-rich area six hours away on foot. [ 405 ] the withdrawal occurred without confrontation. the civil society reported that the updf, which had been stationed on the lubero-kasugho route, took over kasugho, while local officials claimed it was now under wazalendo control. [ 405 ] some believe m23's retreat was to accommodate the ugandan army, as general kainerugaba had posted on x that m23 should pull back 20 kilometers south from lubero (kitsombiro, kipese, kasugho) to open up ugandan-influenced zones. [ 405 ] however, their movement toward bunyatenge complicates the situation, as the town's strategic gold reserves and proximity to mbwavinywa—home to forces patriotiques populaires-armee du people (fpp-ap) headquarters led by kasereka kasiyano, known as general kabidon, a key wazalendo leader and strong kinshasa ally. [ 405 ] that same day, in mbwavinywa, a village near bunyatenge in southern lubero territory , general kabidon declared that the front commun de la résistance (fcr)—a coalition of the fpp-ap and mapenzi's nduma défense du congo-rénové (ndc-r)—had formally aligned with m23 and afc units. [ 406 ] fardc's spokesperson for the northern front, colonel mak hazukay, condemned kabidon's defection, characterizing it as a betrayal motivated by mining interests. [ 407 ] on 8 march, justice minister constant mutamba announced a $9 million bounty for wanted individuals, including $5 million for nangaa, bertrand bisimwa , and makenga. [ 408 ] [ 409 ] [ 410 ] with the occupation of goma by m23 rebels and the mass escape of prisoners from the central prison of munzenze, the security situation continued to degenerate precipitously. between 8–9 march, goma experienced a surge in violence that left three dead. the first incident occurred in katindo , where m23 rebels attacked a group playing cards, fatally shooting a young man as he attempted to flee. [ 411 ] in majengo, jackson kilimandjaro mutondwe, son of former deputy valérien nzanzu kenda kenda, was killed at home by unknown assailants. the third victim was found lifeless on mutakato avenue in mabanga sud. [ 411 ] according to actualite.cd , at least 53 violent deaths were recorded in goma and nyiragongo throughout february 2025. [ 411 ] on 9 march, nyabiondo, long an apcls stronghold under janvier karairi, fell to m23 and afc rebels after intense two-day clashes with fardc and wazalendo. apcls reportedly withdrew before the takeover. [ 412 ] the fighting displaced locals to villages in masisi territory , with many fleeing to kashebere in the luberike groupement in walikale territory , 12 kilometers from nyabiondo. m23, having seized key areas in masisi territory, advanced toward resource-rich walikale , coveted for its minerals. [ 412 ] on 10 march, fardc and wazalendo elements of the union des patriotes congolais (upc) engaged m23 forces in kaziba chiefdom , the second in walungu territory affected after ngweshe chiefdom . [ 413 ] m23 advanced from nyangezi through the nyanfunzu escarpments to mushenyi, a strategic gateway to kaziba chiefdom, where it clashed with fardc and wazalendo units in cibanda groupement . [ 413 ] later that night, m23 and afc forces seized the chiefdom's capital lwanguku, targeting the royal court, where gunfire was reported to persist. reports suggested that the rebels had entered the town center but had not secured full dominance over the entire chiefdom. [ 414 ] amid escalating violence, tshisekedi met with lourenço in luanda on 11 march to discuss the deteriorating security situation. angola offered to mediate talks between the congolese government and m23; [ 415 ] [ 416 ] [ 417 ] however, kinshasa insisted that any discussions be conducted within the framework of unsc resolution 2773 , which aligns with the luanda and nairobi peace processes, as well as the resolutions from the dar es salaam summit. [ 418 ] the congolese government reiterated its stance that m23's involvement should be addressed within this framework. [ 418 ] that same day, hrw reported that since m23 and afc captured goma in january, they had systematically threatened, detained, and attacked journalists, critics, and activists. [ 419 ] hrw further noted that m23 fighters in north and south kivu had issued death threats through audio recordings of phone calls, messages, and speeches, targeting independent media and civil society organizations. [ 419 ] over 200 activists had sought protection as a result, as the rebels also employed intimidation tactics to restrict the population's access to information and suppress dissent, making it increasingly difficult for journalists to report on the situation in goma. [ 419 ] on 12 march, m23 and afc forces arrived in idjwi territory , a historically demilitarized zone, disembarking from maritime vessels without encountering resistance and subsequently convening a meeting. [ 420 ] with the annexation of idjwi, m23 and afc consolidated their control over seven of south kivu's eight territories — kabare , walungu , uvira , fizi , mwenga , and now idjwi—leaving only shabunda territory unaffected at this juncture. [ 420 ] on the same day, france suspended new development aid projects in rwanda and pledged to improve humanitarian assistance for approximately seven million displaced individuals affected by the conflict. [ 421 ] concurrently, following the capture of kaziba chiefdom, m23 and afc forces advanced toward rurambo and kigarama in bafuliiru chiefdom , where they met resistance from ruma hondwa's wazalendo faction. [ 3 ] the fighting in rurambo and kigarama persisted into 13 march, but hondwa's faction ultimately withdrew after fuliiru rebel leader rushaba and his wazalendo faction defected to m23 and afc. [ 3 ] shortly thereafter, rushaba's wazalendo unit from masango welcomed m23 and afc fighters in kashama, ceding several strategic locations to facilitate their movement into the area. [ 3 ] rushaba's defection was seen as a blow to the task force—a coalition of congolese and burundian forces allied with wazalendo fighters. having previously fought alongside nyamusaraba and burundian forces within the task force, rushaba's shift in loyalty triggered new clashes in kashama before he joined m23 and afc in battling the task force in kigarama. [ 3 ] concurrently, the sadc declared the cessation of its military intervention, announcing a phased withdrawal of its samidrc troops, and its alignment with the sadc-eac summit's resolutions on merging the luanda and nairobi peace processes while welcoming unsc resolution 2773. [ 422 ] [ 423 ] [ 424 ] in goma, m23 and afc rebels raided cbca ndosho hospital at night, shooting a man and causing widespread panic. [ 425 ] on 14 march, due to rising tensions in walikale , alphamin bisie mining (abm), the drc's largest tin producer, located 180 km northwest of goma, 60 km from walikale, and 32 km from the walikale- kisangani road, ceased its operations. [ 426 ] [ 427 ] [ 428 ] that same day, the eu council announced delayed sanctions against nine individuals linked to the ongoing violence but withheld their names, with eu foreign ministers scheduled to approve the sanctions on 17 march in brussels. [ 429 ] [ 430 ] [ 431 ] m23 forces in cirunga, kabare territory 's capital, killed a suspected wazalendo combatant who attempted to push them out near the central prison on 14 march afternoon. [ 432 ] meanwhile, g7 foreign ministers from canada, france, germany, italy , japan , the uk, and the us, along with the eu's high representative, met in quebec from 12–14 march, condemning the m23 offensive and the subsequent violence, displacement, and human rights abuses, while calling for support for eac and sadc-led mediation, accountability for all armed groups' abuses, and a peaceful, inclusive resolution. [ 433 ] on 15 march, lourenço urged a ceasefire from midnight on 16 march, including ending attacks on civilians and territorial advances, to foster peace talks in luanda between the congolese government and m23. [ 434 ] however, instead of observing the ceasefire, m23 and afc occupied the ntea village in the ihana groupement , walikale territory . [ 435 ] simultaneously, wazalendo forces took control of kaziba chiefdom and the localities of kigarama and rurambo in the uvira highlands. [ 436 ] m23 and afc elements advancing from kaziba chiefdom reached as far as marungu and kahololo, areas that serve as strongholds for the twirwaheno, android, and red-tabara coalition, while also housing idp camps that were placed under the protection of the twirweneho following the departure of monusco . [ 436 ] in fizi territory, trésor ebuela wa seba, also known as ebuela mtetezi, leader of the wazalendo fpdc-ml faction, was killed in a confrontation with another wazalendo faction. [ 437 ] [ 438 ] intelligence sources reported that two wazalendo military convoys from maniema , led by a commander identified as brauni and en route to reinforce uvira under general william yakutumba , were intercepted by commander toronto's wazalendo forces in lutete, north of baraka . [ 437 ] the ensuing clashes lasted for several hours, resulting in the deaths of mtetezi and several others. some sources alleged that mtetezi had facilitated m23-afc advances in fizi territory's highlands and intended to align with m23-rdf-afc, though his associates denied these claims. [ 437 ] on 16 march, m23 and afc forces captured kibua , situated over 80 km from walikale, defying the ceasefire call. [ 435 ] the following day, 17 march, the two factions expanded their territorial control by seizing mpofi in the utunda groupement , 52 km from walikale . armed clashes continued in mutakato village within the banabangi groupement , leading to the mass displacement of walikale's population. [ 435 ] [ 439 ] displaced persons traveled along the rn3 road towards kisangani , with villages along the kisangani axis, including losso, mungele, tingi tingi, lubutu, mubi, ndjingala, lobu, and makana, receiving thousands of refugees from walikale. [ 439 ] that day, belgium announced reciprocal diplomatic measures after rwanda decided to sever diplomatic ties and expel belgian diplomats within 48 hours. rwanda justified the move by accusing belgium of neocolonial ambitions, a violent historical role, and hostility toward kigali in the drc conflict while also accusing it of sheltering groups promoting genocidal ideology. [ 440 ] belgian foreign minister maxime prévôt called the decision "disproportionate" and regretted that "when we disagree with rwanda, it prefers not to engage in dialogue". in response, belgium summoned rwanda's chargé d'affaires , declared rwandan diplomats persona non grata , and suspended government cooperation agreements. [ 440 ] meanwhile, as previously scheduled, the eu imposed targeted sanctions on rwandan officials and m23 leaders. sanctioned rdf officers include ruki karusisi, commander of special forces in eastern drc; eugène nkubito, 3rd division commander in north kivu since 2022; and pascal muhizi, 2nd division commander in eastern drc since 2023. [ 441 ] [ 442 ] among m23 rebels, the eu sanctioned leader bisimwa, already under un sanctions, along with recruitment head désiré rukomera, colonel john imani nzenze, deputy finance chief jean-bosco nzabonimpa mupenzi, and finance leader-turned-north kivu governor jean bahati musanga, while also listing francis kamanzi, ceo of rwanda mines, petroleum and gas board, for exploiting conflict minerals and gasabo gold refinery for illegally importing gold from m23-controlled areas. [ 441 ] [ 442 ] in response, afc and m23 rescinded their participation in the angolan-mediated luanda talks, decrying the sanctions as impediments to dialogue and accusing international institutions of "sabotaging" peace efforts while claiming the measures strengthened tshisekedi's alleged "warmongering" stance. [ 443 ] [ 444 ] [ 445 ] a joint sadc-eac ministerial meeting held in harare adopted a roadmap awaiting approval at a subsequent summit, with immediate measures set to be implemented within 30 days, including military-level dialogue for an unconditional ceasefire, cessation of hostilities, reopening of goma and kavumu airports, and evacuation of conflict zones. [ 446 ] a joint verification mechanism (jvm), comprising sadc and eac representatives with possible reinforcements from the icglr and monusco, was established to monitor compliance, while a technical assessment team of 12 to 16 experts evaluated the security, humanitarian, and infrastructural situation in north and south kivu. [ 446 ] medium-term measures (30-120 days) focus on confidence-building, negotiations, and mediation, with a permanent ceasefire declaration and an enhanced monusco role advocated. notably, the sadc-eac statement did not explicitly acknowledge rwanda's involvement in supporting m23. [ 446 ] meanwhile, the international contact group for the great lakes region (icg), led by germany and including belgium, denmark, the eu, france, the netherlands, sweden, switzerland, the uk, and the us, reaffirmed support for angola's de-escalation efforts while also calling for the implementation of unsc resolution 2773 and the immediate withdrawal of rwandan and m23 forces from the drc. [ 447 ] in walikale, fardc and wazalendo forces, reinforced by troops from bunia , halted the m23 and afc advance, forcing the rebels to retreat to mpofi. [ 448 ] on 18 march, m23 and afc engaged wazalendo forces in clashes at kembe, located between ruvungi and mpofi along the walikale road. fighting continued until midday, with wazalendo launching offensives from kibua while m23 and afc attempted to reinforce their position in mpofi. [ 449 ] on the humanitarian front, the congolese red cross , cited by amnesty international , reported the recovery of 406 bodies, including 110 civilians, in south kivu between 17 february and 13 march. [ 450 ] in bukavu alone, 43 bodies, including 29 civilians, were collected. amnesty international attributed the escalating violence and civilian casualties primarily to m23 operations in the region. [ 450 ] during a doha meeting mediated by qatar's emir , sheikh tamim bin hamad al thani , the drc and rwanda agreed to an immediate, unconditional ceasefire, with tshisekedi and kagame also welcoming progress in the luanda and nairobi processes, the eac-sadc summit, and pledging to continue talks for a lasting resolution. [ 451 ] [ 452 ] [ 453 ] on 19 march, m23 and afc rebels overran fardc defensive positions in ngora, 12 km from walikale, advancing to mubanda, just 4 km from walikale's threshold, while fardc troops moved along the kisangani axis. [ 454 ] later that evening, m23 and afc captured walikale after conducting a two-pronged offensive strategy—one contingent engaging wazalendo forces in kembe and kigoma, while the other advanced via ngora to mubanda, thus cutting off fardc's frontline contingents along the masisi -walikale transit corridor. [ 455 ] that same day, unjhro published its january 2025 human rights report, documenting 309 violations across the drc, affecting 808 victims (550 men, 114 women, 95 individuals of unknown gender and age, and 49 children). [ 456 ] north kivu accounted for 60% of reported abuses, followed by ituri and south kivu (13.9% each). north kivu recorded eight victims of conflict-related sexual violence (three attributed to m23, three to fdlr, and two to fardc), while south kivu had three cases (two linked to nyatura wazalendo and one to fardc). [ 456 ] m23 was identified as the primary perpetrator of serious violations against children, accounting for 69% of cases, followed by nyatura (12%) and mai-mai mazembe (7%). [ 457 ] meanwhile, in fizi territory, wazalendo, led by self-proclaimed general kakobanya nakalambi, clashed with the twirwaheno, android, and red-tabara coalition, allied with m23, in mikenge, mwenga territory, leaving five twirwaneho fighters dead and several others injured. [ 458 ] by 20 march, m23 and afc secured key positions in walikale, including kigoma airfield, nyalusukulabure military camp, the unit podium, the territorial office, and kirima height in kisima. some residents fled, while others sought refuge at walikale general hospital and the msf base. [ 459 ] china reaffirmed its support for the drc's sovereignty, condemned m23's occupation, and urged an immediate withdrawal while also expressing readiness to ratify a bilateral security cooperation agreement with the drc. [ 460 ] meanwhile, in fizi territory, wazalendo combat units clashed with twirwaneho, android, and red-tabara contingents in kawera village, six kilometers from minembwe , as part of an assertive campaign to reclaim strategic footholds. [ 461 ] on 21 march, a small white twin-engine aircraft with an undetermined registration number landed at kigoma airfield for 30 minutes before departing. the previous afternoon, another unidentified aircraft had flown over walikale without landing. [ 462 ] two people, including a police officer, succumbed to gunshot wounds at walikale general hospital following engagements between the m23-afc coalition and the fardc-wazalendo alliance. [ 463 ] explosions were reported across walikale as wazalendo launched a counteroffensive, while a sukhoi military jet conducted an airstrike targeting kigoma airfield. [ 464 ] m23 and afc rebels issued a three-day ultimatum for those sheltering at the general hospital and msf base to return home. many residents fear this is an attempt to use them as human shields, believing wazalendo's resistance is far from over. [ 465 ] in uvira territory, wazalendo forces led by self-proclaimed general ilunga rusesema and general jean nalube clashed with rdf troops attempting to cross into muravya. fighting was reported in marimba, rubarati, and surrounding villages. [ 466 ] concurrently, twirwaneho and m23 fighters stationed in kahololo sought to advance toward muravya via masango but encountered resistance from wazalendo. in a separate maneuver, m23 and rdf forces attempted to cross from kageregere toward muranvia-minembwe. [ 466 ] in minembwe, wazalendo engaged with the twirwaneho-red tabara-android coalition near mulira and kakenge, following wazalendo's recapture of several villages in the mutambala sector . [ 467 ] the strategic village of kawera was retaken by wazalendo, which continued its advance toward minembwe, reclaiming kivumu, irumba, and nyagishasha. [ 467 ] in masisi territory, charles kalibiri, the village chief of malehe within the kamuronza groupement , was executed at point-blank range by unidentified assailants in the birere 1 neighborhood in sake . [ 468 ] on 22 march, m23 and afc declared their withdrawal from walikale and nearby areas, three days after seizing control. they cited efforts to "promote conditions for peace initiatives and political dialogue". [ 469 ] [ 470 ] their communique alluded to the unilateral ceasefire proclamation of 22 february, yet warned that any fardc offensive against their positions or civilians within their controlled territories would nullify the withdrawal. however, m23 and afc fighters remained stationed in four out of walikale's six neighborhoods. [ 470 ] in response, kayikwamba remarked, "we are all being tested by our words and actions. many promises, commitments, and concessions have been made. we will see if m23 truly withdraws and prioritizes dialogue, peace, and human lives, which have not been a priority so far". [ 471 ] she stressed the need for "concrete actions", reaffirming the drc's commitment to peace through dialogue while urging m23 to consider civilian welfare. [ 471 ] fardc pledged to monitor the withdrawal east of kibati in alignment with the 18 march joint declaration by qatar, the drc, and rwanda. [ 472 ] while refraining from launching offensives, fardc encouraged wazalendo to support de-escalation and ongoing peace negotiations but maintained the right to intervene if the ceasefire, civilians, or territorial integrity were threatened. [ 472 ] that same day, amid prolonged hostilities and stalled diplomatic efforts, kayikwamba stated that the government was open to direct negotiations with m23 to halt violence against civilians, declaring, "given the evolution of the conflict and the ineffectiveness of previous ceasefires, we deemed it appropriate to engage in direct discussions with the m23 if this can help stop the violence". [ 473 ] in walungu territory, m23 forces clashed with wazalendo in nyangezi, kamina hill, and namurambira as wazalendo attempted to retake the munya center. [ 474 ] the intense fighting resulted in mass displacement, with residents reporting explosions throughout the region. [ 474 ] in kisangani, four children fleeing clashes between the fardc and m23 and afc rebels in walikale died when a tree fell on them during heavy rain in mika forest. [ 475 ] on 23 march, m23 rebels were spotted advancing through the forest of the bilo bilo village near mubi. [ 472 ] rwanda welcomed m23's repositioning from walikale and kinshasa's halt of fardc and wazalendo offensives, reaffirming its commitment to regional stability. [ 476 ] meanwhile, ituri's military governor, general johnny luboya nkashama, faced public threats from muhoozi, who called him "very stupid" and accused him of opposing updf operations. muhoozi warned of his imminent arrest and suggested the updf would capture kisangani if m23 delayed. [ 477 ] fardc chief of general staff lieutenant general jules banza mwilambwe arrived in kisangani to inspect military units in the 3rd defense zone. [ 478 ] in walikale, m23 rebels killed a civilian and looted an abandoned fardc ration depot at kigoma airfield. [ 478 ] on 24 march, an unidentified white twin-engine aircraft again landed and departed from kigoma airfield, its origin unclear as walikale remained under m23 control. [ 479 ] lourenço stated that angola had exhausted efforts to mediate disputes fueling instability in eastern drc and would defer the matter to the au to appoint a new mediator. [ 480 ] [ 481 ] [ 482 ] a joint sadc-eac virtual summit, co-chaired by kenyan president william ruto and zimbabwean president emmerson mnangagwa , adopted the 17 march ministerial report and ordered its implementation, while leaders reaffirmed commitments from the 8 february eac-sadc summit, the 14 february au peace and security council meeting, and unsc resolution 2773, stressing the need for coordinated efforts to address the crisis. [ 483 ] in goma, a 13-year-old girl's body was found floating in lake kivu, and four other bodies—including that of 24-year-old bisimwa marie wani—were discovered in different neighborhoods as analysts believe some victims found in congolese republican guard uniforms had been moved and dressed in fatigues to obscure their identities. [ 484 ] on 25 march, wazalendo temporarily occupied katana in kabare territory before retreating soon after. [ 485 ] in walikale, the congolese red cross collected at least 30 bodies, mostly civilians and soldiers. [ 486 ] [ 487 ] by 26 march, m23 and afc rebels had fortified their positions both aerially and terrestrially. a plane carrying additional m23 and afc rebels landed at kigoma airfield, while fardc reinforcements arrived by land, strengthening positions in boboro, 24 km from walikale, with more troops from biruwe. [ 488 ] [ 489 ] three people were killed and three others injured during clashes between m23-afc and wazalendo forces in luchembe village, which straddles buleusa and rusamabu in the ikobo groupement of walikale territory. [ 490 ] m23 and afc then seized buleusa, while wazalendo held rusamabu, forcing many residents to flee to miriki in southern lubero territory. [ 490 ] on 27 march, the fardc carried out airstrikes on kigoma airfield after an aircraft landed, using drones and a sukhoi fighter jet. the bombardment targeted m23 and afc assets, destroying an aircraft and a vehicle. [ 489 ] [ 491 ] bintou keita cautioned the unsc that m23 and afc were expanding their operations further into north and south kivu with potential incursions into tshopo and maniema and urged the reopening of goma and kavumu airports to facilitate humanitarian aid deliveries and monusco troop rotations. [ 492 ] [ 493 ] the following day, on 28 march, sadc chiefs of staff and afc-m23 leaders convened at goma's serena hotel to negotiate the immediate withdrawal of the sadc regional force, samidrc, from goma. [ 494 ] [ 495 ] both sides reaffirmed their commitment to the ceasefire and the unconditional withdrawal of samidrc as m23 and afc agreed to ensure the safe departure of sadc troops along with their arms and equipment while surrendering any fardc weaponry in their possession and the meeting included a joint evaluation of goma international airport for reopening as sadc pledged to undertake necessary repairs. [ 494 ] [ 495 ] from 28–29 march, four young girls were reportedly raped by armed men in civilian clothes in goma's kasika neighborhood of karisimbi commune . [ 496 ] on 30 march, wazalendo attacked m23-afc's position at walikale's administrative office, destroying it and advancing to the nyalusukula military camp near walikale hospital before withdrawing. [ 497 ] on the southern axis, m23 and afc forces patrolling the walikale-nyasi road clashed with wazalendo in kampala, situated six kilometers from walikale, [ 497 ] resulting in the fatalities of seven rebels and one muzalendo fighter, with two others injured. [ 498 ] in response, m23 and afc scaled back their patrol operations in walikale, shifting their focus to securing kangambili, nyabangi, and cité belge—routes commonly exploited by wazalendo for their operations. [ 498 ] in goma's karisimbi commune , three bodies were found, all killed by gunfire. [ 499 ] on 31 march, bandits broke into several homes in ndosho , stealing phones and money. a young woman was fatally shot. [ 499 ] on 1 april, wazalendo units from apcls, led by janvier karairi, attacked masisi from the nyabiondo-bukombo axis but were forced to retreat due to logistical setbacks, leaving masisi under m23-afc control. [ 500 ] in goma's katindo neighborhood, phone credit seller oswald nshuti was fatally shot, and his money stolen. another body was found on 2 april in majengo, karisimbi. [ 499 ] m23-afc rebels withdrew from walikale between 1–3 april, [ 501 ] though some sources suggest that wazalendo's offensive on 2 april had already compelled their retreat before fardc forces entered on 3 april. [ 502 ] fardc and wazalendo redeployed to walikale, securing kigoma airfield, the territorial administrative office, and nyalusukula military camp, enabling displaced persons to return. [ 501 ] m23 repositioned in kasopo and kibanda, near the masisi – walikale border, after occupying nyabiondo during their retreat. [ 503 ] on 3 april, gunfire erupted in walikale hitting the msf base as the skirmish stemmed from an internal wazalendo dispute where one faction attempted to loot while another opposed them resulting in five wazalendo fighters injured two in serious condition and one civilian casualty. [ 504 ] [ 502 ] in response to the crisis, france committed €3 million in emergency assistance for eastern drc. [ 505 ] meanwhile, former sankuru governor joseph-stéphane mukumadi formally declared his allegiance to m23-afc rebels. [ 506 ] around masisi and ngungu, wazalendo-apcls attacked m23-afc-rdf forces in camp saio, aiming to reopen the road. the fighting left six dead, eight injured, and two missing, including three children among the dead. [ 507 ] on 4 april, wazalendo-apcls looted shops and homes near ngumba before reaching bihambwe, en route to kironge and busekere. they later regrouped near numbi to attempt a counteroffensive. [ 507 ] on 5 april, eight decomposed bodies were discovered in walikale, with four identified as a fardc soldier, a police officer, and two m23 rebels, while the identities of the remaining bodies found in mubanda couldn't be determined due to the similar uniforms worn by fardc and m23-afc. [ 508 ] meanwhile, the au formalized the appointment of togolese president faure gnassingbé as mediator in the drc-rwanda conflict, replacing lourenço. the appointment, ratified during a virtual au meeting, was met with skepticism by several congolese political actors. [ 509 ] [ 510 ] on 6 april, wazalendo ousted m23 rebels in the bushaku village in kalehe territory. [ 511 ] a day later, authorities discovered ten additional decomposed bodies in mubalaka near walikale's eastern entrance, all of which wore military-style uniforms, complicating identification efforts. [ 512 ] at a press briefing, un spokesperson stéphane dujarric warned that explosive remnants of war in walikale pose a danger to returning residents, urging local groups to advise against premature returns until demining activities are completed and accentuating similar risks reported in south kivu that endanger communities and hamper humanitarian efforts. [ 513 ] meanwhile, heavy fighting resumed in kalehe territory after m23 appointed jean bosco buseye and faustin ndaye as administrator and deputy, respectively. bushaku, katale, kafufula, and lemera witnessed intense clashes, spreading panic in kalehe center and ihusi, where schools had to close. [ 511 ] lemera also saw a notable gathering of wazalendo fighters. [ 511 ] in goma, about 20 armed m23-afc fighters stormed an msf facility, allegedly searching for displaced people. though they didn't enter medical areas, gunfire hit the premises, killing one person, injuring three others, and leaving two staff members violently assaulted. [ 514 ] on 9 april, representatives from the drc and m23 commenced a second round of qatari-mediated negotiations. however, the discussions were still in the preliminary phase, with both parties unable to reach consensus on preconditions and frameworks for further dialogue. [ 515 ] the m23's demands included amnesty for senior leaders, a formal endorsement of direct dialogue from tshisekedi, the annulment of legislation permitting an alliance with wazalendo, and substantial decision-making authority for the drc delegation during the negotiations in doha. [ 515 ] conversely, the drc called for the m23 to relinquish political control over occupied territories—including goma and bukavu—alongside demands for disarmament and demobilization. due to these disagreements, the negotiations were adjourned later that same day, with no advancements made towards establishing a ceasefire. [ 515 ] from 9–10 april, wazalendo factions from copaco, apdc/rad, and mcdpn—led by self-proclaimed generals kirikicho marimba, bahige, and haguma mic mic (also known as maike)—recaptured several localities in kalehe territory, including lemera, bushaku 1 and 2, nyabarongwa, mwamiwaidjwi, chizi, igali, bishaka, shanje, chambombo, kafufula, katale and lumbishi. [ 516 ] [ 517 ] [ 518 ] despite this progress, m23 forces continued to control numbi, a tin -mining town approximately 14 kilometers east of the recaptured areas. m23 troops also reinforce their positions in kalehe, mobilizing from kavumu airport, located roughly 137 kilometers south of the contested region. [ 515 ] meanwhile, in kabare territory, wazalendo's raïa mutomboki branch from bunyakiri and kalonge clashed with m23 rebels in tshivanga, near kahuzi-biéga national park on 10 april. more fighting was also reported in mudaka. [ 519 ] in walikale, returnees found four more bodies—two in wenga (one decapitated, a civilian killed by m23), one between wenga and nyamianda (an m23 fighter in uniform), and one between mubanda and mubalaka. [ 520 ] amid circulating rumors, the rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie/kisangani–mouvement de libération (rcd/k-ml) denied that its president, antipas mbusa , joined m23. the party reiterated mbusa's commitment to resisting foreign encroachment, the occupation of eastern congo, and the threat posed by the adf in north kivu and ituri. [ 521 ] after leaving the sama lukonde cabinet, mbusa secured a seat as national deputy for beni during the december 2023 elections. [ 521 ] however, africa intelligence reported that in february 2025, he visited kampala—where he owns commercial interests—before flying to europe. [ 522 ] during the visit, he reportedly met with museveni and his son muhoozi to express concerns about m23's incursion into areas dominated by the nande community. [ 522 ] on 11 april, m23 captured seven villages in lubero territory—namely kasenge, lughanga, kiuto, kasiki, mukeberwa, bwavinwa, and pita congo—after clashes with wazalendo. [ 523 ] although updf had tried to block m23's maneuvers in the territory since late february, reports indicated that considerations for the withdrawal of updf troops from lubero territory were being evaluated. [ 524 ] meanwhile, m23 repelled wazalendo offensives around masisi and launched minor counterattacks in nearby villages. wazalendo had previously battled m23 near masisi, but after pulling out, m23 retook buabo village, roughly nine miles to the southwest. [ 525 ] [ 524 ] on the same day, fighting also resumed in lwanguba village, three miles south of masisi. [ 524 ] on goma's outskirts, clashes erupted in the rusayo groupement of bukumu chiefdom inside virunga national park , as wazalendo tried to push m23-afc rebels out of the city. [ 526 ] heavy gunfire and explosions echoed through goma's neighborhoods—kyeshero, ndosho, mugunga, and lac vert—causing widespread panic, especially in kyeshero where the blasts were most intense. [ 526 ] on 12 april, m23-afc officially annulled its cooperation agreement with sadc, accusing samidrc and fardc of joint operations. [ 527 ] that same day, fighting resumed in kabare territory, particularly in katana, kabamba, lwiro, and nyakadaka villages, where an m23 convoy opened fire on wazalendo forces near the nyakadaka plantation. [ 528 ] wazalendo redeployed to kabamba and the center of kavumu, although no direct clashes were reported there. nevertheless, m23 maintained control over kavumu airport. [ 529 ] on 13 april, the congolese government condemned the goma attacks, accusing rdf and m23, and reported 52 deaths, 72 rapes, numerous summary executions, and hundreds missing between 6–11 april. it also accused rwanda and its allies of systematically plundering resources from occupied territories to fund the ongoing conflict. [ 530 ] [ 531 ] [ 532 ] [ 533 ] that same day, wazalendo factions mouvement d'actions pour le changement (mac) and raiya kujikomboa battled m23 in kibanda and kasopo (on the masisi–walikale border), pushing them back to kaandja village, located at the juncture between buhimba (waloa yungu groupement ) and kashebere (luberike groupement ), both in walikale territory. [ 503 ] wazalendo took control of kibanda and kasopo, while m23 held kashebere and kaandja. [ 503 ] in kabare territory, m23 recaptured kabamba, [ 534 ] and between 13–14 april, a tragic incident occurred near goma, where a father and son were murdered in their home, and the mother sustained injuries. [ 535 ] on the following night 14–15 april, assailants assaulted a pastor in virunga after extorting him for money. several accounts emerged of m23's mistreatment of civilians, such as a viral video showing public flogging at stade de l'unité . [ 535 ] forced recruitment, extortion, and widespread intimidation were reported. m23's presence destabilized the local economy: banks closed, food prices soared, and taxes rose—such as in the alanine market ( marché alanine ), where a tax increased fourfold, from 500 to 2,000 cfa. m23 allegedly uses cadeco to manage these collections. [ 535 ] on 16 april, m23-afc and rdf dislodged wazalendo from five villages in kalehe territory: bushaku 1, bushaku 2, lemera, kasheke and mabingu. [ 534 ] meanwhile, an explosion in sake killed one child and injured three others while they were collecting metal scraps, one of which was an undetonated explosive. [ 536 ] from 15–16 april, congolese security forces conducted a warrantless search of kabila's kinshasa residence, searching for stolen state military equipment, including in warehouses, containers, and various vehicles. a second raid followed on 17 april. [ 537 ] that day in nyiragongo territory, radio okapi reported abductions and arbitrary detentions by m23, often involving beatings and phone searches. detained individuals were often transported to undisclosed locations, including underground detention sites. [ 538 ] also on 17 april, massad boulos , senior adviser to u.s. president donald trump on arab, middle eastern, and african affairs, urged rwanda to cease its support for m23 and withdraw its troops from eastern drc. boulos added that the trump administration was weighing a full range of diplomatic and economic options to promote peace. [ 539 ] [ 540 ] [ 541 ] on 18 april, kabila returned to goma via the "grande barrière" border post connecting gisenyi and goma. his arrival ignited political controversy. the union for democracy and social progress (udps) secretary general augustin kabuya accused kabila of being complicit in the m23-afc rebellion, asserting that his return was an admission of responsibility. [ 542 ] government spokesperson patrick muyaya remarked on 19 april that kabila had been linked to the rebellion for several months. [ 543 ] justice minister mutamba initiated legal proceedings against kabila and his alleged accomplices, ordered the seizure of his assets, and suspended all nationwide activities of the people's party for reconstruction and democracy (pprd). interior minister jacquemain shabani accused kabila of exacerbating the eastern conflict and criticized the pprd's silence on rwandan aggression. [ 543 ] between 19–20 april, two civilians were killed in goma's ndosho and kasika neighborhoods by armed individuals in military attire. one of the victims was the director of studies at the tuungane institute. [ 544 ] on 20 april, in the luberike groupement of walikale territory—occupied by m23 rebels—a couple was murdered in their sleep by unidentified gunmen in the kibati forest, where they had sought refuge from the ongoing conflict. [ 545 ] meanwhile, the villages of kabamba, bugamanda, bushaku 1, bushaku 2, kayeye, lemera, and kasheke—situated along the bukavu–kalehe axis—were retaken by a joint fardc and wazalendo campaign. [ 546 ] [ 547 ] the m23-afc rebels vacated the area without issuing any statement. [ 546 ] as they retreated, the rebels engaged in widespread extortion, looted local businesses in the kasheke shopping center, robbed pedestrians of their phones and money, and forced some civilians, particularly youths, to carry their belongings. [ 547 ] numerous homes along national road 2 were pillaged, and the rebels used explosives and heavy gunfire, compelling residents to remain inside their homes. in irambo, a sustained firefight between wazalendo and m23 forces persisted for over an hour. after the altercation, a man in his thirties was fatally shot within the premises of the irambo kalehe catholic parish. [ 547 ] on 21 april, despite prior withdrawals, m23-afc elements remained active in walikale territory, specifically in kashebere and kibati. [ 548 ] that day, actualite.cd reported that 32 people had died, with many others missing, during what was officially recognized as a ceasefire period by the m23-afc in walikale. [ 548 ] the next day, fardc attacked m23 positions in mikumbi, pushing the rebel forces back beyond kibati and advancing towards kashebere, located on the border between walikale and masisi territories. [ 549 ] meanwhile, m23-afc withdrew from the doha peace negotiations, citing objections to a draft communiqué that tied the talks to a tshisekedi–kagame meeting and called for universal disarmament of all armed factions. [ 550 ] they also demanded that fardc and wazalendo withdraw from walikale, framing their own retreat as a gesture of good faith. [ 550 ] on 23 april, radio okapi reported that m23-afc regrouped near luberike to reestablish control. [ 551 ] meanwhile, actualite.cd reported that the group had looted medical supplies and kidnapped three nurses from the kashebere reference health center in the kibua health zone. [ 552 ] [ 553 ] as a result of the m23 advances in 2022, bintou keita , top un official for the drc, described the group as having "conducted itself as a conventional army, rather than an armed group," and warned that the group's capabilities exceeded that of monusco. [ 554 ] according to united nations security council researchers, the presence of individuals in rwandan uniforms among the rebels has been proven through photos and drone footage, partially explaining the m23 forces' increased professionalism. [ 28 ] congolese researcher josaphat musamba concurred, arguing that it was "clear that there is support" behind m23's resurgence. congo research group director jason stearns stated that, though there was "no certainty" about rwanda backing the m23 offensive, the rebels' firepower and various frontline reports made rwandan involvement "very likely". regardless of rwanda's possible role in the offensive, analysts cautioned that m23 had never been just a rwandan pawn, and always maintained its own agenda. [ 555 ] in early august 2022, a report for the un by independent researchers provided further evidence about rwandan support for m23, including photos and videos showcasing rwandan soldiers moving into congolese territory and m23 troops armed with rwandan weaponry. [ 5 ] [ 556 ] in october, a rwandan soldier surrendered to monusco at kiwanja; the congolese government regarded this as a further proof of rwandan support for the rebel offensive. [ 38 ] by january 2023, the united states, several european countries, and un experts believed that rwanda was supporting m23. [ 23 ] by 2025 it was estimated that 4000 to 7000 rdf soldiers were fighting in congo and had suffered significant casualties. satellite images also showed significant expansion in the kanombe military cemetery in kigali, where at least 600 graves have been dug since the beginning of the offensive. [ 557 ] critics argue that both m23 and rwanda have opportunistically exploited the presence of the fdlr as a pretext for broader political and economic ambitions in eastern drc, [ 558 ] [ 73 ] [ 559 ] [ 560 ] particularly since the fdlr no longer poses a substantial military threat to rwanda. [ 80 ] [ 60 ] [ 561 ] [ 67 ] a december 2023 unsc-commissioned report revealed that since october 2023, rdf soldiers had been deployed in nyiragongo , rutshuru , and masisi territories, with rdf and m23 receiving support from 250 e-x fdlr combatants under rwanda's defence intelligence directorate. [ 562 ] there is substantial evidence suggesting that rebel factions backed by rwanda and uganda—including m23—control strategic yet informal supply chains that transport valuable minerals from the kivu region to both countries. [ 563 ] the corridor from bunagana on the ugandan border, through kanyabayonga to goma on the rwandan border, encompasses a lucrative mining belt containing some of the world's largest deposits of coltan , a mineral essential for the production of electronic devices. [ 563 ] [ 53 ] the drc is also the world's largest producer of cobalt , a key component in electric vehicle batteries , which are in high demand globally. [ 564 ] in 2021, u.s. data indicated that rwanda accounted for 15% of the world's tantalum supply, a derivative of coltan ore, despite producing only modest amounts domestically. [ 566 ] in march 2023, congolese finance minister nicolas kazadi reported that the country was losing approximately $ 1 billion annually due to minerals being illicitly smuggled into rwanda. he noted that rwanda's 2022 mineral exports—including gold , tin , tantalum, and tungsten —were valued at nearly $1 billion, despite the country having limited known reserves. [ 566 ] [ 567 ] [ 568 ] the u.s. also purchased 36% of its tantalum imports from rwanda—more than from any other country—while only 7% came from the drc, a major tantalum producer. rwanda has utilized an international network of elites to facilitate the smuggling, sale, and monetization of drc minerals through militarized trade routes. [ 566 ] kigali has received institutional backing to commercialize these minerals via an industry-led compliance framework and companies such as avx corporation , kemet corporation , and global advanced metals , which manufacture electronic components. these firms have been accused of knowingly purchasing minerals of illicit origin. [ 566 ] due diligence teams from major technology companies—including apple , intel , sony , motorola , and lockheed martin —have also been informed that minerals sourced from rwanda were likely smuggled from the drc, often under conditions of violent exploitation. [ 566 ] despite this, these minerals continue to be integrated into global supply chains for products ranging from laptops to aircraft. rwanda, in turn, has cultivated an image as a stable and efficient trading hub within the mineral sector. [ 566 ] in a separate but related case, the international court of justice (icj) ruled in february 2022 that uganda must pay $325 million to the drc in reparations for its role in conflicts between 1998 and 2003, which included the deaths of thousands of civilians in ituri province , the funding of rebel groups, and the illicit extraction of natural resources such as gold, diamonds , and timber . [ 569 ] [ 53 ] since then, gold has since become uganda's leading export, with much of it reportedly originating from drc mines. [ 570 ] similarly, while the drc accounted for 40% of the world's coltan output in 2019, [ 53 ] [ 571 ] [ 572 ] substantial amounts are reportedly funneled illicitly into rwanda, uganda, and burundi. [ 573 ] un investigations have found that while most of the drc's contraband coltan is routed through rwanda, a notable portion is also transported via bunagana and rutshuru into uganda and through uvira into burundi. [ 53 ] in october 2023, the european union (eu) signed a partnership with the drc and zambia to develop raw material supply chains, including infrastructure investment and sustainable resource extraction. the eu stated that securing a stable supply of critical minerals was essential for meeting its green energy and climate goals. [ 574 ] [ 575 ] in february 2024, the eu announced a similar agreement with rwanda, aiming to "nurture sustainable and resilient value chains for critical raw materials". [ 576 ] the eu's investments in rwanda's mineral sector between 2021 and 2024 amounted to $260 million. the agreement recognized rwanda as a key player in global tantalum production, as well as a producer of tin, tungsten, gold, niobium , and potentially lithium and rare earth elements. [ 575 ] the eu further praised rwanda's regulatory environment, stating that it could serve as a hub for mineral processing and value addition. the announcement was met with immediate criticism from the congolese government and civil society organizations. president félix tshisekedi described the deal as a "provocation of very, very bad taste", arguing that it would legitimize mineral smuggling and exploitation. [ 575 ] [ 577 ] [ 578 ] [ 579 ] he asserted that the agreement effectively allowed rwanda to profit from "the blood of our compatriots". [ 577 ] [ 578 ] [ 580 ] drc foreign minister christophe lutundula accused the eu of complicity in the "looting and aggression" against the drc, citing other eu-rwanda agreements on security and military cooperation. [ 575 ] [ 581 ] [ 582 ] [ 583 ] notably, rwandan president paul kagame himself acknowledged that rwanda serves as a transit point for smuggled congolese minerals. he stated that minerals from the drc pass through rwanda to destinations including brussels , tel aviv , russia , and dubai . [ 575 ] in november 2020, the ugandan construction company dott services, a co-financier and developer of road networks linking uganda and the drc, entered a joint venture with the congolese state-owned mining company société aurifère du kivu et du maniema (sakima). [ 53 ] this agreement granted dott services access to strategic mining sites in maniema province , an area rich in tin, tantalum, gold, and tungsten. under the terms of the deal, dott services secured a 70% ownership stake, with sakima retaining 30%. additionally, dott services is committed to establishing a mineral processing facility alongside its infrastructure projects. [ 53 ] the company is widely believed to have close ties to uganda's political elite. [ 53 ] rwanda has also sought to assert its influence in the region's mining sector. in june 2021, kagame and tshisekedi signed an agreement allowing dither ltd—a company reportedly linked to the rwandan military—to refine gold mined by sakima. [ 53 ] the stated objective of the agreement was to curb revenue streams for armed groups operating in the mining sector. however, the drc suspended the deal in june 2022, citing rwanda's alleged support for the resurgent m23 rebellion. [ 53 ] ugandan officials have argued that rwanda's increasing support for m23 was motivated, at least in part, by the disruption of its economic ventures in the drc. during the m23 offensive in bunagana on 23 march 2022, ugandan soldiers intervened to safeguard dott services personnel and assets. the incident heightened tensions between uganda and rwanda, which accused the other of leveraging m23 for economic gain. [ 53 ] in kampala , officials alleged that rwandan-backed m23 elements orchestrated the attack to disrupt uganda's operations in the drc. conversely, in kigali, officials accused uganda of using m23 affiliates to seize the border town, a crucial transit hub for dott services. [ 53 ] stearns argued that the new m23 offensive was possibly aimed at enforcing the group's inclusion in a disarmament, demobilisation, and reintegration (ddr) programme. previous attempts of m23 at becoming part of this process, including after the 2013 agreement, failed due to considerable opposition by the congolese public. one of the issues hampering any attempts to achieve m23's complete demobilisation is the fact that several members of the rebel group are known to have committed various war crimes over several years of involvement in insurgencies, even before m23 itself had emerged. this makes their integration into the congolese security forces or rewarding them with amnesties difficult to justify in the dr congo. [ 555 ]

on 24 february 2022, russia invaded ukraine , starting the largest and deadliest war in europe since world war ii , in a major escalation of the conflict between the two countries which began in 2014. [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] the fighting has caused hundreds of thousands of military casualties and tens of thousands of ukrainian civilian casualties . as of 2025, russian troops occupy about 20% of ukraine . from a population of 41 million, about 8 million ukrainians had been internally displaced and more than 8.2 million had fled the country by april 2023, creating europe's largest refugee crisis since world war ii. in late 2021, russia massed troops near ukraine's borders and issued demands to the west including a ban on ukraine ever joining the nato military alliance. [ 17 ] after repeatedly denying having plans to attack ukraine, on 24 february 2022, russian president vladimir putin announced a " special military operation ", saying that it was to support the russian-backed breakaway republics of donetsk and luhansk , whose paramilitary forces had been fighting ukraine in the war in donbas since 2014. putin espoused irredentist and imperialist views challenging ukraine's legitimacy as a state, baselessly claimed that the ukrainian government were neo-nazis committing genocide against the russian minority in the donbas , and said that russia's goal was to "demilitarise and denazify" ukraine. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] russian air strikes and a ground invasion were launched on a northern front from belarus towards the capital kyiv , a southern front from crimea , and an eastern front from the donbas and towards kharkiv . ukraine enacted martial law , ordered a general mobilisation , and severed diplomatic relations with russia . russian troops retreated from the north and the outskirts of kyiv by april 2022, after encountering stiff resistance and logistical challenges. the bucha massacre was uncovered after their withdrawal. in the southeast, russia launched an offensive in the donbas and captured mariupol after a destructive siege . russia continued to bomb military and civilian targets far from the front, and struck the energy grid during winter months. in late 2022, ukraine launched successful counteroffensives in the south and east , liberating most of kharkiv oblast . soon after, russia illegally annexed four partly-occupied provinces . in november, ukraine liberated kherson . in june 2023, ukraine launched another counteroffensive in the southeast but made few gains. after small but steady russian advances in the east in the first half of 2024, ukraine launched a cross-border offensive into russia's kursk oblast in august, where north korean soldiers were sent to assist russia. the united nations human rights office reports that russia is committing severe human rights violations in occupied ukraine. the direct cost of the war for russia has been over $450 billion usd. [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] the invasion was met with widespread international condemnation . the united nations general assembly passed a resolution condemning the invasion and demanding a full russian withdrawal. the international court of justice ordered russia to halt military operations, and the council of europe expelled russia. many countries imposed sanctions on russia and its ally belarus and provided large-scale humanitarian and military aid to ukraine. the baltic states and poland declared russia a terrorist state. protests occurred around the world, with anti-war protesters in russia being met by mass arrests and greater media censorship . the russian attacks on civilians have led to allegations of genocide . [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] war-related disruption to ukrainian agriculture and shipping contributed to a world food crisis , war-related local environmental damage has been described as ecocide and the war has heavily disrupted global climate policy . the international criminal court (icc) opened an investigation into crimes against humanity , war crimes , abduction of ukrainian children , and genocide against ukrainians. the icc issued arrest warrants for putin and maria lvova-belova and for four russian military officials. after the dissolution of the soviet union in december 1991, the newly independent russian federation and ukraine maintained cordial relations. in return for security guarantees, ukraine signed the nuclear non-proliferation treaty in 1994 and gave up the nuclear weapons it inherited from the soviet union. [ 29 ] russia, the us and uk thus agreed in the budapest memorandum on security assurances to uphold ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity. [ 30 ] in 1999, russia signed the charter for european security , affirming the right of each state "to choose or change its security arrangements" and to join alliances. [ 31 ] in 2002, putin said that ukraine's relations with nato were "a matter for those two partners". [ 32 ] in 2005, putin said that if ukraine wanted to join nato, "we will respect their choice, because it is their sovereign right to decide their own defence policy, and this will not worsen relations between our countries". [ 33 ] russia invaded georgia in august 2008 and took control of the breakaway regions of abkhazia and south ossetia , demonstrating russia's willingness to use military force to attain its political objectives. [ 34 ] political scientist paul d'anieri says the united states "was accused of appeasement and naivete" over its reaction to the invasion. [ 35 ] in 2013, ukraine's parliament overwhelmingly approved finalising an association agreement with the european union (eu), [ 36 ] which had been negotiated for several years. russia did not raise any concerns about the agreement until mid-2013, when it became clear that ukraine would no longer be able to maintain the same level of relations with russia. [ 37 ] russia put pressure on ukraine to reject the agreement and imposed economic sanctions on the country. [ 38 ] kremlin adviser sergei glazyev warned in september 2013 that if ukraine signed the eu agreement, russia would no longer acknowledge ukraine's borders. [ 39 ] in november, ukrainian president viktor yanukovych suddenly withdrew from signing the agreement, [ 40 ] choosing closer ties to the russian-led eurasian economic union instead. this coerced withdrawal triggered a wave of protests known as euromaidan , culminating in the revolution of dignity in february 2014. almost 100 protesters were killed . despite signing an agreement, yanukovych fled. parliament voted to remove him and he ended up in russia. on 27 february 2014, russian soldiers with no insignia began to occupy the ukrainian territory of crimea, [ 41 ] and had fully controlled the peninsula by late march. [ 42 ] at first, russia denied that the soldiers were theirs, but putin later admitted that they were russian special forces. [ 43 ] russia annexed crimea in march 2014, after a widely-condemned and disputed referendum held under occupation. historians liken the annexation to nazi germany's anschluss of austria . [ 44 ] [ 45 ] pro-russian protests immediately followed in the ukrainian cities of donetsk and luhansk . separatists proclaimed the donetsk people's republic (dpr) and luhansk people's republic (lpr). the war in donbas began in april 2014 when armed russian paramilitaries led by igor 'strelkov' girkin seized sloviansk and other settlements, and the ukrainian military began an operation against them. [ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] russia covertly supported the separatists with its own troops, tanks and artillery. [ 49 ] the international criminal court judged that the war was both a national and international armed conflict involving russia, [ 50 ] and the european court of human rights judged that russia controlled the dpr and lpr from 2014 onward. [ 51 ] ukraine's parliament declared the donbas region to be occupied by russia. [ 52 ] the annexation of crimea and the donbas war sparked a wave of russian nationalism . analyst vladimir socor called putin's 2014 speech following the annexation a "manifesto of greater-russia irredentism ". [ 53 ] putin began referring to " novorossiya " (new russia), a former russian imperial territory that covered much of southern ukraine. [ 54 ] russian-backed forces were influenced by russian neo-imperialism [ 55 ] and sought to create a new novorossiya . [ 56 ] putin referred to the kosovo independence precedent and nato bombing of yugoslavia as a justification for military intervention in ukraine. [ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] when the conflict began in early 2014, ukraine was officially a neutral country [ 61 ] and said it was not seeking nato membership. [ 62 ] [ 63 ] because of russia's occupation of crimea and its invasion of the donbas , ukraine's parliament voted in december 2014 to revoke the country's neutral status and to seek ukraine's membership in nato . [ 64 ] [ 65 ] in 2016, president of the european commission , jean-claude juncker , said that it would take 20–25 years for ukraine to join nato. [ 66 ] the minsk agreements , signed in september 2014 and february 2015, aimed to resolve the conflict, but ceasefires and further negotiations repeatedly failed. [ 68 ] the west 's weak response to russia's attack on ukraine in 2014 led russia to believe that the west would not react strongly to the 2022 invasion. [ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] several political scientists said this encouraged further russian aggression. [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] economic interests were also a motive for russia's attack on ukraine and its annexation of the southeast . control of lithium deposits in the donbas and ukraine's grain wealth would give russia a "monopoly on the world market". [ 75 ] in 2022, russian general vladimir ovchinsky confirmed that the "russian special operation" aimed to seize ukrainian lithium deposits. [ 22 ] [ 76 ] the us government estimates that russia's economic losses from the war and western sanctions will amount to around $1.3 trillion by 2025, and russia's direct financial spending on the invasion is estimated at $250 billion (as of late 2024) – costs that russia could not have foreseen. according to a study published in mid-2022 by canadian think tank secdev, russia seized energy reserves, metals and minerals worth at least $12.4 trillion in the donbas, including 41 coal fields (63 percent of ukraine's coal reserves), 27 natural gas fields, 9 oil fields, 6 iron ore deposits, two titanium ore deposits, a strontium deposit, a uranium deposit, a gold deposit and a large limestone quarry. the total value of raw material stocks in ukraine is estimated at over $26 trillion. [ 22 ] the value of lithium and rare earths in ukraine is estimated at $11.5 trillion. [ 76 ] in january 2024, the russian occupation government in donetsk oblast granted the russian ministry of natural resources permission to mine lithium in the shevchenko deposit near kurakhovo, which is estimated to be worth hundreds of billions of us dollars. [ 22 ] the russian elite, especially russian generals, had invested assets and property in ukraine for money laundering purposes before the invasion. [ 75 ] there was a large russian military build-up near ukraine's borders in march and april 2021, [ 77 ] and again in both russia and belarus from october 2021 onward. [ 78 ] russia said it was only holding military exercises . members of the russian government, including putin, repeatedly denied having plans to attack or invade ukraine, issuing denials up until the day before the invasion. [ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] while russian troops massed on ukraine's borders, russia's proxy forces launched thousands of attacks on ukrainian troops in the donbas. [ 82 ] observers from the organization for security and co-operation in europe (osce), which also includes ukraine and russia, reported more than 90,000 ceasefire violations throughout 2021; the vast majority in russian-controlled territory. [ 83 ] in july 2021, putin published an essay " on the historical unity of russians and ukrainians ", in which he called ukraine "historically russian lands" and claimed there is "no historical basis" for the "idea of ukrainian people as a nation separate from the russians". [ 84 ] [ 85 ] days before the invasion, putin claimed that ukraine never had "real statehood" and that the creation of modern ukraine was a mistake. [ 86 ] putin was accused of promoting russian imperialism , [ 87 ] historical revisionism and disinformation. [ 88 ] [ 89 ] in december 2021, russia issued an ultimatum to the west , which included demands that nato end all activity in its eastern european member states and ban ukraine or any former soviet state from ever joining the alliance. [ 17 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] russia's government said nato was a threat and warned of a military response if it followed an "aggressive line". [ 92 ] some of the demands had already been ruled out by nato. a senior us official said the us was willing to discuss the proposals, but added that there were some "that the russians know are unacceptable". [ 90 ] eastern european states willingly joined nato for security reasons, and the last time a country bordering russia had joined was in 2004. ukraine had not yet applied, and some members were wary of letting it join. [ 93 ] barring ukraine would go against nato's " open door " policy, and against treaties agreed to by russia itself. [ 94 ] nato secretary general jens stoltenberg replied that "russia has no say" on whether ukraine joins, and "has no right to establish a sphere of influence to try to control their neighbours". [ 95 ] nato underlined that it is a defensive alliance , and that it had co-operated with russia until the latter annexed crimea. [ 94 ] it offered to improve communication with russia, and to negotiate limits on missile placements and military exercises , as long as russia withdrew troops from ukraine's borders, [ 96 ] but russia did not. western leaders vowed that heavy sanctions would be imposed should putin choose to invade rather than to negotiate. [ 97 ] french president emmanuel macron [ 98 ] and german chancellor olaf scholz met putin in february 2022 to dissuade him from an invasion. according to scholz, putin told him that ukraine should not be an independent state. [ 99 ] scholz told ukrainian president volodymyr zelenskyy to declare ukraine a neutral country and renounce its aspirations to join nato. zelenskyy replied that putin could not be trusted, as he had broken agreements before. [ 100 ] ukraine had been a neutral country in 2014 when russia occupied crimea and invaded the donbas . [ 61 ] [ 101 ] on 19 february, zelenskyy made a speech at the munich security conference , calling for western powers to end their " appeasement " towards putin and give a clear time-frame for when ukraine could join nato. [ 102 ] political analysts taras kuzio and vladimir socor agree that "when russia made its decision to invade ukraine, that country was more remote than ever not only from nato membership but from any track that might lead to membership". [ 91 ] shortly before the invasion, russia's proxy forces stepped up attacks on ukrainian forces and civilians in the donbas. [ 103 ] [ 104 ] separatist leaders warned that ukraine was about to launch an offensive, but they gave no evidence, and the guardian noted that it would be "exceedingly risky" for ukraine to assault the donbas while russian troops were massed on its borders. [ 104 ] ukraine and western leaders accused russia of staging false flag attacks and of trying to provoke retaliation, to give russia a pretext for invading. [ 103 ] [ 104 ] on 17 february, russian proxy forces shelled a kindergarten in ukrainian-held territory, then blamed the strike on ukraine. [ 104 ] zelenskyy said that his military would not respond to the provocations. [ 103 ] according to the royal united services institute , russia's invasion plan involved defeating ukraine within ten days and capturing or killing its government, followed by "mopping up" operations ; establishing filtration camps for ukrainians ; setting up occupation regimes; trying and executing people involved in the revolution of dignity; and lastly annexation. [ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 108 ] the decision to invade was reportedly made by putin and a small group of war hawks or siloviki in putin's inner circle, including national security adviser nikolai patrushev and defence minister sergei shoigu . [ 109 ] on 21 february, putin announced that russia recognised the donetsk people's republic and luhansk people's republic as independent states. the following day, russia announced that it was sending troops into the territories as "peacekeepers", [ 110 ] and the federation council of russia authorised the use of military force abroad. [ 111 ] before 5 a.m. kyiv time on 24 february, putin, in another speech , announced a " special military operation ", which effectively declared war on ukraine. [ 112 ] [ 113 ] putin said the operation was to "protect the people" of the russian-controlled breakaway republics. he baselessly claimed that russians in the donbas had "been facing humiliation and genocide perpetrated by the kyiv regime" for eight years. [ 19 ] putin said that russia was being threatened: he baselessly claimed that ukrainian government officials were neo-nazis under western control, that ukraine was developing nuclear weapons, and that a hostile nato was building up its forces and military infrastructure in ukraine. [ 114 ] [ 115 ] he said russia sought the "demilitarisation and denazification" of ukraine, and denied the legitimacy of the ukrainian state. [ 115 ] [ 86 ] putin said he had no plans to occupy ukraine. [ 114 ] the invasion began within minutes of putin's speech. [ 112 ] the invasion began at dawn on 24 february. [ 112 ] [ 116 ] it was described as the biggest attack on a european country and the first full-scale war in europe since the second world war. [ 117 ] russia launched a simultaneous ground and air attack. [ 118 ] [ 119 ] missiles struck targets throughout ukraine, [ 120 ] and russian troops invaded from the north, east, and south. [ 121 ] russia did not officially declare war. [ 122 ] immediately after the invasion began, zelenskyy declared martial law in ukraine in a first video speech. [ 123 ] the same evening, he ordered a general mobilisation of all ukrainian males between 18 and 60 years old, [ 124 ] prohibiting them from leaving the country. [ 125 ] the "first stage" of the invasion was conducted on four fronts, including one towards western kyiv from belarus by the russian eastern military district , one deployed towards eastern kyiv from russia by the central military district (northeastern front), comprised the 41st combined arms army and the 2nd guards combined arms army , [ 126 ] one deployed towards kharkiv, and a fourth, southern front originating in occupied crimea and russia's rostov oblast with an eastern axis towards odesa and a western area of operations toward mariupol . [ 126 ] the russian invasion was unexpectedly met by fierce ukrainian resistance. [ 127 ] in kyiv, russia failed to take the city and was repulsed in the battles of irpin , hostomel , and bucha . the russians tried to encircle the capital, but its defenders under oleksandr syrskyi held their ground, effectively using western javelin anti-tank missiles and stinger anti-aircraft missiles to thin russian supply lines and stall the offensive. [ 128 ] by 7 april, russian troops deployed to the northern front by the russian eastern military district pulled back from the kyiv offensive, reportedly to resupply and redeploy to the donbas region in an effort to reinforce the renewed invasion of southeastern ukraine. the northeastern front, including the central military district, was similarly withdrawn for resupply and redeployment to southeastern ukraine. [ 126 ] [ 129 ] on 26 april, delegates from the us and 40 allied nations met at ramstein air base in germany to discuss the formation of a coalition that would provide economic support in addition to military supplies and refitting to ukraine. [ 130 ] following putin's victory day speech in early may, us director of national intelligence avril haines said no short term resolution to the invasion should be expected. [ 131 ] ukraine's reliance on western-supplied equipment constrained operational effectiveness, as supplying countries feared that ukraine would use western-made matériel to strike targets in russia. [ 132 ] military experts disagreed on the future of the conflict; some suggested that ukraine should trade territory for peace, [ 133 ] while others believed that ukraine could maintain its resistance due to russian losses. [ 134 ] the invasion began on 24 february, launched out of belarus to target kyiv, and from the northeast against the city of kharkiv. the southeastern front was conducted as two separate spearheads, from crimea and the southeast against luhansk and donetsk. russian tried to seize kyiv quickly with a probative spearhead on 24 february, from belarus south along the west bank of the dnipro river , with spetsnaz infiltrating into the city supported by airborne operations and a rapid mechanised advance from the north, but failed. [ 135 ] [ 136 ] the apparent intent was to encircle the city from the west, supported by two separate axes of attack from russia along the east bank of the dnipro: the western at chernihiv , and from the east at sumy . these were likely intended to encircle kyiv from the northeast and east. [ 118 ] [ 119 ] russian forces advanced into chernihiv oblast on 24 february, besieging its administrative capital within four days of fighting . [ 137 ] [ 138 ] travelling along highways, russian forces reached brovary , an eastern suburb of kyiv, on 4 march. [ 119 ] [ 118 ] the united states contacted zelenskyy and offered to help him flee the country, lest the russian army attempt to kidnap or kill him on seizing kyiv; zelenskyy responded that "the fight is here; i need ammunition, not a ride." [ 139 ] by early march, russian advances along the west side of the dnipro were limited by ukrainian defences. [ 119 ] [ 118 ] as of 5 march, a large russian convoy , reportedly 64 kilometres (40 mi) long, had made little progress toward kyiv. [ 140 ] advances from chernihiv largely halted as a siege began there . russian forces continued to advance on kyiv from the northwest, capturing bucha , hostomel and vorzel by 5 march, [ 141 ] [ 142 ] though irpin remained contested as of 9 march. [ 143 ] by 11 march, the lengthy convoy had largely dispersed and taken cover. [ 144 ] on 16 march, ukrainian forces began a counter-offensive to repel russian forces. [ 145 ] unable to achieve a quick victory in kyiv, russian forces switched their strategy to indiscriminate bombing and siege warfare. [ 146 ] [ 147 ] on 25 march, a ukrainian counter-offensive retook several towns to the east and west of kyiv, including makariv . [ 148 ] [ 149 ] russian troops in the bucha area retreated north at the end of march. ukrainian forces entered the city on 1 april, and recaptured the entire region around kyiv, including irpin, bucha, and hostomel, and uncovered evidence of war crimes in bucha . [ 150 ] [ 151 ] the pentagon confirmed on 6 april that the russian army had left chernihiv oblast ; [ 152 ] the next day, local authorities said that russian troops had left sumy oblast. [ 153 ] nato secretary-general jens stoltenberg said that the russian "retraction, resupply, and redeployment" of their troops from the kyiv area should be interpreted as an expansion of putin's plans for ukraine, by redeploying and concentrating his forces on eastern ukraine. [ 129 ] on 24 february, a russian attack group moved northwest from crimea, capturing a bridge over the dnieper [ 154 ] as well as the north crimean canal . [ 155 ] a third russian attack group from crimea moved northwest and captured the bridge over the dnieper. on 1 march, russian troops took kherson ; this was the first major city to fall to russian forces. [ 156 ] russian troops moved on mykolaiv and attacked it two days later, but were repelled by ukrainian forces. [ 157 ] russian forces approached the zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant on 26 february [ 158 ] and besieged enerhodar . by 25 february, russian units from the dpr had begun advancing on mariupol . [ 159 ] the next day, russian forces captured berdiansk [ 160 ] and approached mariupol. [ 161 ] [ 162 ] on 1 march, denis pushilin , head of the dpr, announced that dpr forces had almost completely surrounded the city of volnovakha . [ 163 ] on 14 march, the ukrainian government said more than 2,500 had died in mariupol. [ 164 ] by 18 march, mariupol was completely encircled and fighting had reached the city centre, hampering efforts to evacuate civilians. [ 165 ] the russians demanded surrender, and the ukrainians refused. [ 166 ] on 27 march, ukrainian deputy prime minister olha stefanishyna said that "(m)ore than 85 percent of the whole town is destroyed." [ 167 ] on 29 march, putin told macron that the bombardment of mariupol would only end when the ukrainians surrendered. on 1 april, russian troops refused safe passage into mariupol to 50 buses sent by the united nations to evacuate civilians. [ 168 ] [ 169 ] in the east, russian troops attempted to capture kharkiv , less than 35 kilometres (22 mi) from the russian border, [ 170 ] and met strong ukrainian resistance. izium was captured by russian forces on 1 april [ 171 ] after a monthlong battle. [ 172 ] on 25 march, the russian defence ministry said it would seek to occupy major cities in eastern ukraine. [ 173 ] on 3 april, following the retreat of russian forces from kyiv, russia expanded its attack on southern ukraine further west, with bombardment and strikes against odesa, mykolaiv, and the zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. [ 174 ] [ 175 ] by 7 april, the renewed massing of russian invasion troops and tank divisions around the towns of izium, sloviansk , and kramatorsk prompted ukrainian government officials to advise the remaining residents near the eastern border of ukraine to evacuate to western ukraine. [ 176 ] by 17 april, russian progress on the southeastern front appeared to be impeded by opposing ukrainian forces in the large, heavily fortified azovstal steel mill and surrounding area in mariupol. [ 177 ] on 19 april, the new york times confirmed that russia had launched a renewed invasion front referred to as an "eastern assault" across a 480-kilometre (300 mi) front extending from kharkiv to donetsk and luhansk, with simultaneous missile attacks again directed at kyiv in the north and lviv in western ukraine. [ 178 ] as of 30 april, a nato official described russian advances as "uneven" and "minor". [ 179 ] an anonymous us defence official called the russian offensive "very tepid", "minimal at best", and "anaemic". [ 180 ] by 30 may, disparities between russian and ukrainian artillery were apparent, with ukrainian artillery being vastly outgunned, in terms of both range and number. [ 132 ] in response to us president joe biden 's indication that enhanced artillery would be provided to ukraine, putin said that russia would expand its invasion front to include new cities in ukraine. in apparent retribution, putin ordered a missile strike against kyiv on 6 june after not directly attacking the city for several weeks. [ 181 ] on 10 june 2022, deputy head of the sbu vadym skibitsky stated that during the sievierodonetsk campaign, the frontlines were where the future of the invasion would be decided: [ 182 ] this is an artillery war now, and we are losing in terms of artillery. everything now depends on what [the west] gives us. ukraine has one artillery piece to 10 to 15 russian artillery pieces. our western partners have given us about 10% of what they have. on 29 june, reuters reported that us intelligence director avril haines, in an update of past us intelligence assessments on the russian invasion, said that us intelligence agencies agree that the invasion will continue "for an extended period of time ... in short, the picture remains pretty grim and russia's attitude toward the west is hardening." [ 183 ] on 5 july, bbc reported that extensive destruction by the russian invasion would cause immense financial damage to ukraine's reconstruction economy, with ukrainian prime minister denys shmyhal telling nations at a reconstruction conference in switzerland that ukraine needs $750b for a recovery plan and russian oligarchs should contribute to the cost. [ 184 ] in june 2022 the chief spokesman for the russian ministry of defence igor konashenkov revealed that russian troops were divided between the army groups "centre" commanded by colonel general aleksander lapin and "south" commanded by army general sergey surovikin . [ 185 ] on 20 july, lavrov announced that russia would respond to the increased military aid being received by ukraine from abroad as justifying the expansion of its special military operation to include objectives in both the zaporizhzhia and kherson oblasts. [ 186 ] russian ground forces started recruiting volunteer battalions from the regions in june 2022 to create a new 3rd army corps within the western military district, with a planned strength estimated at 15,500–60,000 personnel. [ 187 ] its units were deployed to the front around the time of ukraine's 9 september kharkiv oblast counteroffensive , in time to join the russian retreat, leaving behind tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, and personnel carriers: the 3rd army corps "melted away" according to forbes , having little or no impact on the battlefield along with other irregular forces. [ 188 ] on 13 april, russian forces intensified their attack on the azovstal iron and steel works in mariupol. [ 189 ] by 17 april, russian forces had surrounded the factory. ukrainian prime minister denys shmyhal said that the ukrainian soldiers had vowed to ignore the renewed ultimatum to surrender and to fight to the last soul. [ 177 ] on 20 april, putin said that the siege of mariupol could be considered tactically complete, since the 500 ukrainian troops entrenched in bunkers within the azovstal iron works and estimated 1,000 ukrainian civilians were completely sealed off from any type of relief. [ 190 ] after consecutive meetings with putin and zelenskyy, un secretary-general guterres on 28 april said he would attempt to organise an emergency evacuation of survivors from azovstal in accordance with assurances he had received from putin on his visit to the kremlin. [ 191 ] on 30 april, russian troops allowed civilians to leave under un protection. [ 192 ] by 3 may, after allowing approximately 100 ukrainian civilians to depart from the azovstal steel factory, russian troops renewed their bombardment of the steel factory. [ 193 ] on 6 may, the daily telegraph reported that russia had used thermobaric bombs against the remaining ukrainian soldiers, who had lost contact with the kyiv government; in his last communications, zelenskyy authorised the commander of the besieged steel factory to surrender as necessary under the pressure of increased russian attacks. [ 194 ] on 7 may, the associated press reported that all civilians were evacuated from the azovstal steel works at the end of the three-day ceasefire. [ 195 ] after the last civilians evacuated from the azovstal bunkers, nearly two thousand ukrainian soldiers remained barricaded there, 700 of them injured. they were able to communicate a plea for a military corridor to evacuate, as they expected summary execution if they surrendered to russian forces. [ 196 ] reports of dissent within the ukrainian troops at azovstal were reported by ukrainska pravda on 8 may indicating that the commander of the ukrainian marines assigned to defend the azovstal bunkers made an unauthorised acquisition of tanks, munitions, and personnel, broke out from the position there and fled. the remaining soldiers spoke of a weakened defensive position in azovstal as a result, which allowed progress to advancing russian lines of attack. [ 197 ] ilia somolienko , deputy commander of the remaining ukrainian troops barricaded at azovstal, said: "we are basically here dead men. most of us know this and it's why we fight so fearlessly." [ 198 ] on 16 may, the ukrainian general staff announced that the mariupol garrison had "fulfilled its combat mission" and that final evacuations from the azovstal steel factory had begun. the military said that 264 service members were evacuated to olenivka under russian control, while 53 of them who were "seriously injured" had been taken to a hospital in novoazovsk also controlled by russian forces. [ 199 ] [ 200 ] following the evacuation of ukrainian personnel from azovstal, russian and dpr forces fully controlled all areas of mariupol. the end of the battle also brought an end to the siege of mariupol. russia press secretary dmitry peskov said russian president vladimir putin had guaranteed that the fighters who surrendered would be treated "in accordance with international standards" while ukrainian president volodymyr zelenskyy said in an address that "the work of bringing the boys home continues, and this work needs delicacy—and time." some prominent russian lawmakers called on the government to deny prisoner exchanges for members of the azov regiment . [ 201 ] a russian missile attack on kramatorsk railway station in the city of kramatorsk took place on 8 april, reportedly killing at least 61 people [ 202 ] and injuring as many as 87 to 300. [ 203 ] on 11 april, zelenskyy said that ukraine expected a major new russian offensive in the east. [ 204 ] american officials said that russia had withdrawn or been repulsed elsewhere in ukraine, and therefore was preparing a retraction, resupply, and redeployment of infantry and tank divisions to the southeastern ukraine front. [ 205 ] [ 206 ] military satellites photographed extensive russian convoys of infantry and mechanised units deploying south from kharkiv to izium on 11 april, apparently part of the planned russian redeployment of its northeastern troops to the southeastern front of the invasion. [ 207 ] on 18 april, with mariupol almost entirely overtaken by russian forces, the ukrainian government announced that the second phase of the reinforced invasion of the donetsk, luhansk and kharkiv oblasts had intensified with expanded invasion forces occupying of the donbas. [ 208 ] on 22 may, the bbc reported that after the fall of mariupol, russia had intensified offensives in luhansk and donetsk while concentrating missile attacks and intense artillery fire on sievierodonetsk, the largest city under ukrainian control in luhansk oblast. [ 209 ] on 23 may, russian forces were reported entering the city of lyman , fully capturing the city by 26 may. [ 210 ] [ 211 ] ukrainian forces were reported leaving sviatohirsk . [ 212 ] by 24 may, russian forces captured the city of svitlodarsk . [ 213 ] on 30 may, reuters reported that russian troops had breached the outskirts of sievierodonetsk. [ 214 ] by 2 june, the washington post reported that sievierodonetsk was on the brink of capitulation to russian occupation with over 80 per cent of the city in the hands of russian troops. [ 215 ] on 3 june, ukrainian forces reportedly began a counter-attack in sievierodonetsk. by 4 june, ukrainian government sources claimed 20% or more of the city had been recaptured. [ 216 ] on 12 june, it was reported that possibly as many as 800 ukrainian civilians (as per ukrainian estimates) and 300–400 soldiers (as per russian sources) were besieged at the azot chemical factory in sievierodonetsk. [ 217 ] [ 218 ] with the ukrainian defences of sievierodonetsk faltering, russian invasion troops began intensifying their attack upon the neighbouring city of lysychansk as their next target city in the invasion. [ 219 ] on 20 june it was reported that russian troops continued to tighten their grip on sievierodonetsk by capturing surrounding villages and hamlets surrounding the city, most recently the village of metelkine. [ 220 ] on 24 june, cnn reported that, amid continuing scorched-earth tactics being applied by advancing russian troops, ukraine's armed forces were ordered to evacuate sievierodonetsk; several hundred civilians taking refuge in the azot chemical plant were left behind in the withdrawal, with some comparing their plight to that of the civilians at the azovstal steel works in mariupol in may. [ 221 ] on 3 july, cbs announced that the russian defence ministry claimed that the city of lysychansk had been captured and occupied by russian forces. [ 222 ] on 4 july, the guardian reported that after the fall of the luhansk oblast, that russian invasion troops would continue their invasion into the adjacent donetsk oblast to attack the cities of sloviansk and bakhmut . [ 223 ] on 6 september 2022, ukrainian forces launched a surprise counteroffensive in the kharkiv region , beginning near balakliia , led by general syrskyi . [ 224 ] an emboldened kyiv launched a counteroffensive 12 september around kharkiv successful enough to make russia admit losing key positions and for the new york times to say that it dented the image of a "mighty putin". kyiv sought more arms from the west to sustain the counteroffensive. [ 225 ] on 21 september 2022, vladimir putin announced a partial mobilisation and minister of defence sergei shoigu said 300,000 reservists would be called. [ 226 ] he also said that his country would use "all means" to "defend itself". mykhailo podolyak, an adviser to zelenskyy, said that the decision was predictable and that it was an attempt to justify "russia's failures". [ 227 ] british foreign office minister gillian keegan called the situation an "escalation", [ 228 ] while former mongolian president tsakhiagiin elbegdorj accused russia of using russian mongols as "cannon fodder". [ 229 ] in late september 2022, russian-installed officials in ukraine organised referendums on the annexation of the occupied territories of ukraine. these included the donetsk people's republic and the luhansk people's republic in russian-occupied donetsk and luhansk oblasts of ukraine, as well as the russian-appointed military administrations of kherson oblast and zaporizhzhia oblast. denounced by ukraine's government and its allies as sham elections , the elections' official results showed overwhelming majorities in favour of annexation. [ 230 ] on 30 september 2022, vladimir putin announced the annexation of ukraine's donetsk, luhansk, kherson and zaporizhzhia oblasts in an address to both houses of the russian parliament . [ 231 ] ukraine, the united states, the european union and the united nations all denounced the annexation as illegal. [ 232 ] on 29 august, zelenskyy announced the start of a full-scale counteroffensive in the southeast to retake russian-occupied territory in the kherson and mykolaiv regions. [ 233 ] by 4 september, ukrainian forces had retaken the village of vysokopillia . [ 234 ] ukrainian attacks also continued along the southern frontline, though reports about territorial changes were largely unverifiable. [ 235 ] in october, ukrainian forces pushed further south towards the city of kherson, taking control of 1,170 square kilometres (450 sq mi) of territory, with fighting extending to dudchany . [ 236 ] [ 237 ] on 9 november, defence minister shoigu ordered russian forces to leave part of kherson oblast, including the city of kherson , and move to the eastern bank of the dnieper. [ 238 ] on 11 november, ukrainian troops entered kherson, as russia completed its withdrawal. this meant that russian forces no longer had a foothold on the west (right) bank of the dnieper. [ 239 ] ukrainian forces launched another surprise counteroffensive on 6 september in the kharkiv oblast near balakliia led by general syrskyi. [ 224 ] by 7 september, ukrainian forces had advanced some 20 kilometres (12 mi) into russian occupied territory and claimed to have recaptured approximately 400 square kilometres (150 sq mi). russian commentators said this was likely due to the relocation of russian forces to kherson in response to the ukrainian offensive there. [ 240 ] on 8 september, ukrainian forces captured balakliia and advanced to within 15 kilometres (9.3 mi) of kupiansk . [ 241 ] military analysts said ukrainian forces appeared to be moving towards kupiansk, a major railway hub, with the aim of cutting off the russian forces at izium from the north. [ 242 ] on 9 september, the russian occupation administration of kharkiv oblast announced it would "evacuate" the civilian populations of izium, kupiansk and velykyi burluk . the institute for the study of war (isw) said it believed kupiansk would likely fall in the next 72 hours, [ 243 ] while russian reserve units were sent to the area by both road and helicopter. [ 244 ] on the morning of 10 september, photos emerged claiming to depict ukrainian troops raising the ukrainian flag in the centre of kupiansk, [ 245 ] and the isw said ukrainian forces had captured approximately 2,500 square kilometres (970 sq mi) by effectively exploiting their breakthrough. [ 246 ] later in the day, reuters reported that russian positions in northeast ukraine had "collapsed" in the face of the ukrainian assault, with russian forces forced to withdraw from their base at izium after being cut off by the capture of kupiansk. [ 247 ] by 15 september, an assessment by uk 's ministry of defence confirmed that russia had either lost or withdrawn from almost all of their positions west of the oskil river . the retreating units had also abandoned various high-value military assets. [ 248 ] the offensive continued pushing east and by 1 october, ukrainian armed forces had liberated the key city of lyman . [ 249 ] after the end of the twin ukrainian counteroffensives, the fighting shifted to a semi-deadlock during the winter, [ 250 ] with heavy casualties but reduced motion of the frontline. [ 251 ] russia launched a self-proclaimed winter offensive in eastern ukraine, but the campaign ended in "disappointment" for moscow, with limited gains as the offensive stalled. [ 250 ] [ 252 ] analysts variously blamed the failure on russia's lack of "trained men", and supply problems with artillery ammunition, among other problems. [ 250 ] [ 252 ] near the end of may, mark galeotti assessed that "after russia's abortive and ill-conceived winter offensive, which squandered its opportunity to consolidate its forces, ukraine is in a relatively strong position." [ 253 ] on 7 february, the new york times reported that russians had newly mobilised nearly 200,000 soldiers to participate in the offensive in the donbas, against ukraine troops already wearied by previous fighting. [ 254 ] the russian private military company wagner group took on greater prominence in the war, [ 255 ] leading "grinding advances" in bakhmut with tens of thousands of recruits from prison battalions taking part in "near suicidal" assaults on ukrainian positions. [ 252 ] in late january 2023, fighting intensified in southern zaporizhzhia oblast, with both sides suffering heavy casualties. [ 256 ] in nearby southern parts of donetsk oblast, an intense, three-week russian assault near the coal-mining town of vuhledar was called the largest tank battle of the war to date, and ended in disaster for russian forces, who lost "at least 130 tanks and armored personnel carriers" according to ukrainian commanders. the british ministry of defence stated that "a whole russian brigade was effectively annihilated." [ 257 ] [ 258 ] in late 2022, as russian casualties exceeded 50,000, the russian army introduced barrier troops . the u.k. defence ministry stated that these are units that threaten to shoot their own retreating soldiers in order to compel offensives. in march 2023, russian soldiers filmed a video addressed to president putin where they stated that after suffering casualties, they attempted to return to their headquarters but their superiors denied them evacuation. they stated that barrier troops were placed behind them threatening to "destroy them". [ 259 ] in particular, storm-z units have been reported to be "kept in line" by barrier troops. [ 260 ] following defeat in kherson and kharkiv, russian and wagner forces focused on taking the city of bakhmut and breaking the half year long stalemate that prevailed there since the start of the war. russian forces sought to encircle the city, attacking from the north via soledar . after taking heavy casualties, russian and wagner forces took control of soledar on 16 january 2023. [ 261 ] [ 262 ] by early february 2023, bakhmut was facing attacks from north, south and east, with the sole ukrainian supply lines coming from chasiv yar to the west. [ 263 ] on 4 march, bakhmut's deputy mayor told news services that there was street fighting in the city. [ 264 ] on 20 may 2023, the wagner group claimed full control over bakhmut, and a victory in the battle was officially declared by russia the next day, [ 265 ] following which wagner forces retreated from the city in place of regular russian units. [ 266 ] in june 2023, ukrainian forces gradually launched a series of counteroffensives on multiple fronts, including donetsk oblast, zaporizhzhia oblast, and others. [ 267 ] on 8 june 2023, counteroffensive efforts focused near settlements such as orikhiv , tokmak , and bakhmut. [ 268 ] counteroffensive operations faced stiff resistance from russia, [ 269 ] and the american think tank institute for the study of war described the russian defensive effort as having "an uncharacteristic degree of coherency". [ 270 ] by 12 june, ukraine reported its fastest advance in seven months, claiming to have liberated several villages and advanced a total of 6.5 km. russian military bloggers also reported that ukraine had taken blahodatne , makarivka and neskuchne , and were continuing to push southward. [ 271 ] ukraine continued to liberate settlements over the next few months, raising the ukrainian flag over the settlement of robotyne in late august. [ 272 ] on 24 june, the wagner group launched a brief rebellion against the russian government, capturing several cities in western russia largely unopposed before marching towards moscow. [ 273 ] this came as the culmination of prolonged infighting and power struggles between wagner and the russian ministry of defence. [ 274 ] after about 24 hours, the wagner group backed down [ 275 ] and agreed to a peace deal in which wagner leader yevgeny prigozhin would go into exile in belarus, and his forces would be free from prosecution. [ 273 ] on 27 june, the uk's ministry of defence reported that ukraine were "highly likely" to have reclaimed territory in the eastern donbas region occupied by russia since 2014 among its advances. pro-russian bloggers also reported that ukrainian forces had made gains in the southern kherson oblast, establishing a foothold on the left bank of the dnipro river. [ 276 ] in august, the guardian reported that ukraine had become the most mined country in the world, with russia laying millions of mines attempting to thwart ukraine's counteroffensive. the vast minefields forced ukraine to extensively de-mine areas to allow advances. ukrainian officials reported shortages of men and equipment as ukrainian soldiers unearthed five mines for every square metre in certain places. [ 277 ] following russia pulling out of the black sea grain initiative , the conflict on the black sea escalated with ukraine targeting russian ships. on 4 august, ukrainian security service sources reported that the russian landing ship olenegorsky gornyak had been hit and damaged by an unmanned naval drone . video footage released by ukraine's security services appeared to show the drone striking the ship, with another video showing the ship seemingly listing to one side. [ 278 ] on 12 september, both ukrainian and russian sources reported that russian naval targets in sevastopol had been struck by unconfirmed weaponry, damaging two military vessels, one of them reportedly a submarine. [ 279 ] ukraine also reported that several oil and gas drilling platforms on the black sea held by russia since 2015 had been retaken. [ 280 ] in september 2023, ukrainian intelligence estimated that russia had deployed over 420,000 troops in ukraine. [ 281 ] on 21 september, russia began missile strikes across ukraine, damaging the country's energy facilities. [ 282 ] on 22 september, the us announced it would send long-range atacms missiles to ukraine, [ 283 ] despite the reservations of some government officials. [ 284 ] the same day, the ukrainian main directorate of intelligence launched a missile strike on the black sea fleet headquarters in sevastopol, crimea, killing several senior military officials. [ 285 ] [ 286 ] in mid-to-late october 2023, ukrainian marines—partly guided by defecting russian troops—crossed the dnipro river (the strategic barrier between eastern and western ukraine), downstream of the destroyed kakhovka dam , to attack the russian-held territory on the east side of the river. despite heavy losses due to intense russian shelling and aerial bombardment, disorganisation, and dwindling resources, ukrainian brigades invading the russian-held side of the river continued to inflict heavy casualties on russian forces well into late december. [ 287 ] [ 288 ] on 1 december 2023, volodymyr zelenskyy stated that the ukrainian counter-offensive was not successful, citing slower than expected results. [ 289 ] zelenskyy also stated that it will be easier for ukraine to regain the crimean peninsula than the donbas region in the east of the country, because the donbas is heavily militarised and there are frequent pro-russian sentiments. [ 290 ] in december 2023, multiple international media outlets described the ukrainian counteroffensive as having failed to regain any significant amount of territory or meet any of its strategic objectives. [ 289 ] [ 291 ] [ 292 ] in october 2023, it was reported that there was a growth of mutinies among russian troops due to the large number of losses in russian offensives around avdiivka with a lack of artillery, food, water and poor command also being reported. [ 293 ] by november, british intelligence said that recent weeks had "likely seen some of the highest russian casualty rates of the war so far." [ 294 ] on 17 february 2024, russia captured avdiivka , a longtime stronghold for ukraine that had been described as a "gateway" to nearby donetsk . [ 295 ] [ 296 ] [ 297 ] abc news stated that russia could use the development to boost morale with the war largely at a stalemate close to its second anniversary. [ 298 ] described by forbes journalist david axe as a pyrrhic russian victory, the russian 2nd and 41st combined arms armies ended up with 16,000 men killed, tens of thousands wounded and around 700 vehicles lost before seizing the ruins of avdiivka. [ 299 ] ukraine's shortage of ammunition caused by political deadlock in the us congress and a lack of production capacity in europe contributed to the ukrainian withdrawal from avdiivka, and was "being felt across the front" according to time . the shortage resulted in ukraine having to ration its units to fire only 2,000 rounds per day, compared to an estimated 10,000 rounds fired daily by russia. [ 300 ] on 10 may 2024, russia began a renewed offensive in kharkiv oblast . russia managed to capture a dozen villages, and ukraine had evacuated more than 11,000 people from the region since the start of the offensive by 25 may. ukraine said on 17 may that its forces had slowed the russian advance, and by 25 may zelenskyy said that ukrainian forces had secured "combat control" of areas where russian troops entered the northeastern kharkiv oblast. russian officials said that they were "advancing in every direction" and that the goal was to create a "buffer zone" for embattled border regions. [ 301 ] [ 302 ] the white house said on 7 june that the offensive had stalled and was unlikely to advance further. [ 303 ] following the russian success in the battle of avdiivka, their forces advanced northwest of it to form a salient, and by mid-april 2024 reached the settlement of ocheretyne , capturing it in late april [ 304 ] [ 305 ] and further expanding the salient in the succeeding months. [ 306 ] russian forces also launched an offensive towards the city of chasiv yar in early april, [ 307 ] a strategically important settlement west of bakhmut, and by early july had captured its easternmost district. [ 308 ] [ 309 ] another offensive in the direction of the city of toretsk was launched on 18 june, [ 310 ] with the goal of capturing the city, [ 311 ] and according to ukrainian military observer and spokesperson nazar voloshyn, flanking chasiv yar from the south. [ 312 ] russian forces advanced to expand the salient northwest of avdiivka in july, and on 19 july, made a breakthrough allowing them to begin advancing towards the operationally significant city of pokrovsk . [ 313 ] [ 314 ] on 6 august 2024, ukraine launched their first direct offensive into russian territory, the largest of any pro-ukrainian incursion since the invasion's inception, into the bordering kursk oblast . [ 315 ] the main axis of the initial advance centred in the direction of the town of sudzha , located 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) from the border, [ 316 ] which was reported by president zelenskyy to have been captured on 15 august. [ 317 ] ukraine, taking advantage of the lack of experienced units and defences along the border with kursk oblast, was able to quickly seize territory in the opening days of the incursion. [ 318 ] the incursion caused russia to divert thousands of troops from occupied ukrainian territory to counter the threat, [ 319 ] [ 320 ] though not from donetsk oblast. [ 320 ] despite repeated deadlines set by putin to push out ukrainian troops, russian forces had still not yet done so by the end of january 2025, with advances in donetsk oblast being prioritized over the kursk salient. however, by february 2025, russian forces in donetsk oblast were described by the isw as not being fully protected from the theater-wide impacts of the incursion, with troops, armored vehicles, artillery, and air defense systems being pulled away from ukrainian sectors to reinforce the russian forces in kursk. [ 321 ] [ 322 ] russian troops continued advancing in eastern ukraine, notably at a faster pace than prior to the kursk offensive, [ 323 ] including towards the strategically important city of pokrovsk , where their number of forces had instead been increased. [ 324 ] [ 325 ] [ 326 ] in late august 2024, russian forces seized the city of novohrodivka , southeast of pokrovsk, bringing them within 8 kilometres of the city, [ 323 ] while capturing krasnohorivka [ 327 ] and ukrainsk , [ 328 ] near pokrovsk and west of donetsk city, in early september. [ 328 ] in late september, a russian assault on the long-held city of vuhledar began , [ 329 ] leading to its fall on 1 october. [ 330 ] ukraine's 72nd mechanised brigade had defended the city for over two years, and said that the russians had suffered "numerous losses" as they stormed the elevated city. following the russian capture, the city with a pre-war population of about 14,000 was described as a "sprawling ruin". [ 331 ] on 30 october, ukrainian major general dmytro marchenko was reported to have said "our front has crumbled" due to a dwindling ammunition supply, problems with military recruitment, and poor leadership. he said zelensky's victory plan was too heavily focused on seeking more western support. briefings from western officials had also become more pessimistic about ukraine's military situation. [ 332 ] [ 333 ] according to the prosecutor general's office, more than 100,000 criminal cases for desertion were initiated by the end of november 2024. [ 334 ] russian forces then captured the city of kurakhove in late december 2024, and the nearby kurakhove power station in january 2025. [ 335 ] [ 336 ] in early 2025, russian forces advanced in eastern ukraine, [ 337 ] [ 338 ] capturing velyka novosilka and most of toretsk by late january. [ 339 ] [ 340 ] russia continued attacks on the ukrainian energy infrastructure. [ 341 ] in february 2025, ukraine's government approved a one-year contract for volunteers aged 18–24 who are currently not subject to mobilization. [ 342 ] the supreme commanders-in-chief are the heads of state of the respective governments: president vladimir putin of russia and president volodymyr zelenskyy of ukraine. putin has reportedly meddled in operational decisions, bypassing senior commanders and giving orders directly to brigade commanders. [ 343 ] us general mark milley wrote in may 2022 that ukraine's top military commander in the war, commander-in-chief of the armed forces of ukraine , general valerii zaluzhnyi , "has emerged as the military mind his country needed. his leadership enabled the ukrainian armed forces to adapt quickly with battlefield initiative against the russians." [ 344 ] russia began the invasion with no overall commander. the commanders of the four military districts were each responsible for their own offensives. [ 345 ] after initial setbacks, the commander of the russian southern military district, aleksandr dvornikov , was placed in overall command on 8 april 2022, [ 346 ] while still responsible for his own campaign. russian forces benefited from the centralisation of command under dvornikov, [ 347 ] but continued failures to meet expectations in moscow led to multiple changes in overall command: [ 345 ] russia has suffered a remarkably large number of casualties in the ranks of its officers, including a number of generals . [ 348 ] aerial warfare began the first day of the invasion. dozens of missile attacks were recorded across both eastern and western ukraine, [ 118 ] [ 119 ] reaching as far west as lviv. [ 349 ] by september 2022, the ukrainian air force had shot down about 55 russian warplanes. [ 350 ] in mid-october, russian forces launched missile strikes against ukrainian infrastructure , intended to knock out energy facilities. [ 351 ] by late november, hundreds of civilians had been killed or wounded in the attacks, [ 352 ] and rolling blackouts had left millions without power. [ 353 ] in december 2022, drones launched from ukraine allegedly carried out several attacks on dyagilevo and engels air bases in western russia , killing 10 and heavily damaging two tu-95 aircraft. [ 354 ] on 31 july 2022, russian navy day commemorations were cancelled after a drone attack reportedly wounded several people at the russian black sea fleet headquarters in sevastopol. [ 355 ] on 9 august 2022, large explosions were reported at saky air base in western crimea. satellite imagery showed at least eight aircraft damaged or destroyed. initial speculation attributed the explosions to long-range missiles, sabotage by special forces or an accident; [ 356 ] ukrainian general valerii zaluzhnyi claimed responsibility on 7 september. [ 357 ] the base is near novofedorivka , a destination popular with tourists. traffic backed up at the crimean bridge after the explosions with queues of civilians trying to leave the area. [ 358 ] a week later russia blamed "sabotage" for explosions and a fire at an arms depot near dzhankoi in northeastern crimea that also damaged a railway line and power station. russian regional head sergei aksyonov said that 2,000 people were evacuated from the area. [ 359 ] on 18 august, explosions were reported at belbek air base north of sevastopol. [ 360 ] on the morning of 8 october 2022 the kerch bridge , linking occupied crimea to russia, partially collapsed due to an explosion . [ 361 ] on 17 july 2023, there was another large explosion on the bridge. [ 362 ] since fall of 2022, russia has carried out waves of strikes on ukrainian electrical and water systems. [ 363 ] on 6 october the ukrainian military reported that 86 shahed 136 kamikaze drones had been launched by russian forces in total, and between 30 september and 6 october ukrainian forces had destroyed 24 out of 46 launched in that period. [ 364 ] on 8 october, it was announced that general of the army sergey surovikin would be commanding all russian forces in ukraine on the strength of his novel air assault technique. [ 365 ] on 16 october 2022, the washington post reported that iran was planning to supply russia with both drones and missiles. [ 366 ] on 18 october the us state department accused iran of violating resolution 2231 by selling shahed 131 and shahed 136 drones to russia, [ 367 ] agreeing with similar assessments by france and the united kingdom. iran denied sending any arms to russia for the ukraine war. [ 368 ] on 22 october france, britain and germany formally called for a un investigation. [ 369 ] on 1 november, cnn reported that iran was preparing to send ballistic missiles and other weapons to russia for use in ukraine. [ 370 ] on 15 november 2022, russia fired 85 missiles at the ukrainian power grid , causing major power outages in kyiv and neighboring regions. [ 371 ] on 21 november, cnn quoted an intelligence assessment that iran had begun to help russia produce iran-designed drones in russia. [ 372 ] on 31 december, putin in his new year address called the war against ukraine a "sacred duty to our ancestors and descendants" as missiles and drones rained down on kyiv. [ 373 ] on 10 march 2023, the new york times reported that russia had used new hypersonic missiles in a massive missile attack on ukraine. such missiles are more effective in evading conventional ukrainian anti-missile defences that had previously proved useful against russia's conventional, non-hypersonic missile systems. [ 374 ] the strikes against ukrainian infrastructure were part of russia's 'strategic operation for the destruction of critically important targets' (sodcit) military doctrine, said the uk defence ministry, intended to demoralise the population and forcing the ukrainian leadership to capitulate. [ 375 ] according to the royal united services institute (rusi), [ 376 ] russian strikes had cumulatively destroyed 9 gigawatts (gw) of ukraine's domestic power generation by mid-june 2024. peak consumption during the winter of 2023 was 18 gw, which means that half of ukraine's production capacity has been destroyed. on 8 july 2024, russia used a kh-101 missile [ 377 ] to kill at least two people and injure at least 16 people at the okhmatdyt children's hospital in kyiv. [ 378 ] [ 379 ] [ 380 ] also hit the same night were facilities in pokrovsk and kryvyi rih . [ 381 ] at least 20 civilians were killed in kyiv that night. [ 382 ] ukraine lies on the black sea , which has ocean access only through the turkish-held bosphorus and dardanelles straits. on 28 february 2022, turkey invoked the 1936 montreux convention and sealed off the straits to russian warships that were not registered to black sea home bases and returning to their ports of origin. it specifically denied passage through the turkish straits to four russian naval vessels. [ 383 ] on 24 february, the state border guard service of ukraine announced that russian navy ships had begun an attack on snake island . [ 384 ] the guided missile cruiser moskva and patrol boat vasily bykov bombarded the island with deck guns. [ 385 ] the russian warship identified itself and instructed the ukrainians on the island to surrender. their response was " russian warship, go fuck yourself! " [ 386 ] after the bombardment, a detachment of russian soldiers landed and took control of snake island . [ 387 ] russia said on 26 february that us drones had supplied intelligence to the ukrainian navy to help it target russian warships in the black sea. the us denied this. [ 388 ] by 3 march, ukrainian forces in mykolaiv scuttled the frigate hetman sahaidachny , the flagship of the ukrainian navy, to prevent its capture by russian forces. [ 389 ] on 24 march, ukrainian officials said that a russian landing ship docked in berdiansk—initially reported to be the orsk and then its sister ship, the saratov —was destroyed by a ukrainian rocket attack. [ 160 ] [ 390 ] in march 2022, the un international maritime organization (imo) sought to create a safe sea corridor for commercial vessels to leave ukrainian ports. [ 391 ] on 27 march, russia established a sea corridor 80 miles (130 km) long and 3 miles (4.8 km) wide through its maritime exclusion zone , for the transit of merchant vessels from the edge of ukrainian territorial waters southeast of odesa. [ 392 ] [ 393 ] ukraine closed its ports at marsec level 3, with sea mines laid in port approaches, pending the end of hostilities. [ 394 ] [ failed verification ] the russian cruiser moskva , the flagship of the black sea fleet , was, according to ukrainian sources and a us senior official, [ 395 ] hit on 13 april by two ukrainian neptune anti-ship cruise missiles , setting the ship afire. the russian defence ministry said the warship had suffered serious damage from a munition explosion caused by a fire, and that its entire crew had been evacuated. [ 396 ] pentagon spokesman john kirby reported on 14 april that satellite images showed that the russian warship had suffered a sizeable explosion onboard but was heading to the east for expected repairs and refitting in sevastopol . [ 397 ] later the same day, the russian ministry of defence stated that the moskva had sunk while under tow in rough weather. [ 398 ] on 15 april, reuters reported that russia launched an apparent retaliatory missile strike against the missile factory luch design bureau in kyiv where the neptune missiles used in the moskva attack were manufactured and designed. [ 399 ] on 5 may, a us official confirmed that the us gave "a range of intelligence" (including real-time battlefield targeting intelligence ) [ 400 ] to assist in the sinking of the moskva . [ 401 ] on 1 june, russian foreign minister sergey lavrov asserted that ukraine's policy of mining its own harbours to impede russian maritime aggression had contributed to the food export crisis, saying: "if kyiv solves the problem of demining ports, the russian navy will ensure the unimpeded passage of ships with grain to the mediterranean sea." [ 402 ] on 30 june 2022, russia announced that it had withdrawn its troops from the island in a "gesture of goodwill". [ 403 ] the withdrawal was later confirmed by ukraine. [ 404 ] on 26 december 2023, ukraine's air force attacked the russian landing ship novocherkassk docked in feodosia . ukraine said it was destroyed—unlikely to sail again. russian authorities confirmed the attack, but not the loss, and said two attacking aircraft were destroyed. independent analysts said the ship's loss could hamper future russian attacks on ukraine's coast. [ 405 ] [ 406 ] [ 407 ] on 31 january 2024, ukrainian sea drones struck the russian tarantul-class corvette ivanovets in the black sea, causing the ship to sink. [ 408 ] [ 409 ] two weeks later on 14 february, the same type of ukrainian sea drones struck and sank the russian landing ship tsezar kunikov . [ 410 ] [ 411 ] ukrainian civilians resisted the russian invasion by volunteering for territorial defence units, making molotov cocktails , donating food, building barriers like czech hedgehogs , [ 412 ] and helping to transport refugees. [ 413 ] responding to a call from ukravtodor , ukraine's transportation agency, civilians dismantled or altered road signs, [ 414 ] constructed makeshift barriers, and blocked roadways. [ 415 ] social media reports showed spontaneous street protests against russian forces in occupied settlements, often evolving into verbal altercations and physical standoffs with russian troops. [ 416 ] by the beginning of april, ukrainian civilians began to organise as guerrillas, mostly in the wooded north and east of the country. the ukrainian military announced plans for a large-scale guerrilla campaign to complement its conventional defence. [ 417 ] people physically blocked russian military vehicles, sometimes forcing them to retreat. [ 416 ] [ 418 ] the russian soldiers' response to unarmed civilian resistance varied from reluctance to engage the protesters, [ 416 ] to firing into the air, to firing directly into crowds. [ 419 ] there have been mass detentions of ukrainian protesters, and ukrainian media has reported forced disappearances, mock executions, hostage-taking, extrajudicial killings , and sexual violence perpetrated by the russian military. [ 420 ] to facilitate ukrainian attacks, civilians reported russian military positions via a telegram chatbot and diia , a ukrainian government app previously used by citizens to upload official identity and medical documents. in response, russian forces began destroying mobile phone network equipment, searching door-to-door for smartphones and computers, and in at least one case killed a civilian who had pictures of russian tanks. [ 421 ] as of 21 may 2022, zelenskyy indicated that ukraine had 700,000 service members on active duty fighting the russian invasion. [ 422 ] ukraine withdrew soldiers and military equipment back to ukraine over the course of 2022 that had been deployed to united nations peacekeeping missions like monusco in the democratic republic of the congo. [ 423 ] in response to the invasion, many countries have supplied military aid to ukraine including weaponry, equipment, training, and logistical support. western and other countries imposed limited sanctions on russia in the prelude to the invasion and applied new sanctions when the invasion began, intending to cripple the russian economy; [ 424 ] [ 425 ] sanctions targeted individuals, banks, businesses, monetary exchanges, exports, and imports. [ 424 ] military assistance has mostly been co-ordinated through the ukraine defence contact group , whose more than fifty countries include all 32 member states of nato . [ 426 ] from january 2022 to january 2024, $380 billion in aid to ukraine was tracked by the kiel institute . [ 427 ] european countries have provided the most aid in total (military, financial and humanitarian). [ 428 ] estonia and denmark have provided the most military aid as a share of gdp. [ 429 ] the european union co-ordinated the supply of military aid for the first time. [ 430 ] meanwhile, the united states has provided the most military assistance to ukraine, [ 428 ] and has set aside $175 billion to help the country. [ 429 ] most of the us military aid has been old american weaponry and equipment from reserve stockpiles , while most of the us funding earmarked for ukraine stays in the us economy and supports us industries, subsidizing the manufacture of weapons and military equipment. [ 429 ] [ 431 ] bulgaria supplied ukraine with over one third of the ammunition needed in the early phase of the invasion and a plurality of needed fuel. [ 432 ] although india has maintained a neutral stance on the invasion, [ 433 ] reports indicate that artillery shells made by indian manufacturers were sold to european countries and then diverted to ukraine. indian officials have not intervened despite objections from russia. [ 434 ] most of ukraine's supporters ruled out sending troops to the country in the early months of the invasion. [ 435 ] president emmanuel macron of france later said in 2024 that sending troops was a possibility. [ 436 ] the russian government has threatened retaliation against countries supplying military aid to ukraine, and said it meant nato was waging a proxy war against russia. [ 437 ] according to the atlantic council 's peter dickinson, russia's government has not followed through on its threats, despite most of its " red lines " being crossed. [ 438 ] president putin said that if military aid stopped, ukraine would not survive for long. [ 439 ] belarus has allowed russia to use its territory to stage part of the invasion, and to launch russian missiles into ukraine. [ 440 ] belarus airspace was used by russia, including for radar early warning and control missions, until 2023, when a russian beriev a-50 surveillance plane was damaged by drones . [ 441 ] because of its active involvement, belarus is considered a co-belligerent [ 442 ] [ 443 ] in this invasion, as contrasted to non-belligerent states, which have "a wide range of tools available to non-belligerent actors without reaching the threshold of warfighting". [ 444 ] political scientist matthew frear considers belarus a co- combatant , with " lukashenko repeatedly stated his support for putin's military actions", [ 445 ] while 2023 issue of iiss 's "armed conflict survey" journal classified it as not a direct co-combatant . [ 446 ] belarus provided russia with weapons and ammunition, and later, according to the 2024 issue of "armed conflict survey", russia deployed tactical nuclear weapons in belarus. [ 447 ] in june 2023, us military intelligence suggested iran was providing both shahed combat drones and production materials to develop a drone manufactory to russia. [ 448 ] in february 2024, a reuters report indicated that iran sent ballistic missiles to the russian military. [ 449 ] according to the us and ukraine, iranian troops have been stationed in crimea to assist russia in launching drone attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure. [ 450 ] [ 451 ] the institute for the study of war assessed that these are likely islamic revolutionary guard corps (irgc) or irgc-affiliated personnel. [ 452 ] iran has denied sending arms to russia for use against ukraine. [ 368 ] north korea has supplied russia with ballistic missiles and launchers although us authorities did not mention the specific models. based on debris left by missiles on 30 december 2023 attacks against ukrainian targets show parts common to kn-23, kn-24 and kn-25 missiles. [ 453 ] [ 454 ] in october 2024, ukraine and south korea claimed that north korean engineers had been deployed to the battlefield to help with the launch of these missiles, and had suffered some casualties. [ 455 ] [ 456 ] [ 457 ] later the same month, a white house spokesperson said that the united states was "concerned" about reports that north korean soldiers were fighting for russia in ukraine. [ 458 ] [ 459 ] [ 460 ] a day later, zelensky announced that ukrainian intelligence believed there were 10,000 north korean troops preparing to join russian forces on the front line. [ 461 ] the north korean government rejected these claims and stated that none of their soldiers were fighting for russia. [ 462 ] [ 463 ] [ 464 ] the us later said it had seen evidence that north korea had sent 3,000 soldiers to russia for possible deployment to ukraine, determining that the soldiers had been transported from north korea by ship in early-to-mid october and were undergoing training at three military bases in eastern russia. the us added that the alleged north korean deployment could be further evidence that the russian military was having problems with manpower. [ 465 ] on 28 october, nato chief mark rutte confirmed earlier ukrainian intelligence that north korean troops had been deployed to kursk oblast to support russia against the 2024 kursk offensive , and the pentagon reported an increased number of 10,000 north korean soldiers sent to train in russia and fight in the war. [ 466 ] [ 467 ] [ 468 ] on 7 november, the ukrainian defence minister reported that north korean troops had been engaged in battle on 5 november. [ 469 ] on 13 november, both the us state department and south korea confirmed that north korean troops had begun engaging in combat against ukrainian forces in kursk oblast. [ 470 ] [ 471 ] [ 472 ] the pentagon could not confirm the claims. [ 473 ] on 24 november, the ukrainian chief of general staff confirmed that north korean troops have been engaged in battle. [ 474 ] on 2 december the pentagon stated that it has no evidence of north korean troops engaged in combat, but noted that north korean soldiers had been integrated into russian units. [ 475 ] a representative of the ukrainian intelligence directorate confirmed that north korean troops have been integrated into russian units held in reserve but said that north korean troops are unlikely to be engaged in combat on the front line and are still engaged in training. the presence of north korean troops in kursk is seen as enabling russia in its fight against ukraine. [ 476 ] on 16 december, the us confirmed that north korean troops had been killed and injured in combat in russia's kursk oblast. [ 477 ] by 18 december, the number of killed and wounded north korean soldiers had reportedly reached "a couple hundred", [ 478 ] while south korea reported 100 north koreans dead and 1000 injured. [ 479 ] writing in december 2024 for the lieber institute 's articles of war publication, us army jag officers steve szymanski and joshua c.t. keruski stated that north korea had become a party to an international armed conflict with ukraine as of the 5 november 2024 engagement. [ 480 ] zelenskyy also showcased footage which he said showed russian troops burning the faces of killed north korean soldiers in an attempt to conceal their presence on the battlefield. [ 481 ] [ 482 ] [ 483 ] [ 484 ] in january 2025 two north korean servicemen were taken prisoner while fighting in kursk oblast . intelligence debriefings indicate that north korean soldiers have been issued with false military papers stating that they are russians hailing from tuva . [ 485 ] in march 2025, south korea’s joint chiefs of staff said that north korea had sent an additional 3,000 soldiers to support russia in the war on ukraine. [ 486 ] politico reported in march 2023 that chinese state-owned weapons manufacturer norinco shipped assault rifles, drone parts, and body armor to russia between june and december 2022, with some shipments via third countries including turkey and the united arab emirates . [ 488 ] according to the united states, chinese ammunition has been used on battlefields in ukraine. [ 489 ] in may 2023, the european union identified that chinese and uae firms were supplying weapon components to russia. [ 490 ] in april 2024, china was reported to have provided russia with geospatial intelligence , machine tools for tanks, and propellants for missiles. [ 491 ] in september 2024, reuters reported documents indicating russia had established a weapons programme in china to develop and produce long-range attack drones, with assistance from local specialists, for use in the invasion of ukraine. [ 492 ] russia imports sensitive electronics, machinery, auto parts, and defence equipment from india. [ 493 ] trade like oil sales has surged since 2022, boosting revenue for russian state-owned companies. to bypass sanctions and manage its currency surplus, russia pays in rupees, supporting both civilian and military needs. [ 494 ] [ 495 ] russian and ukrainian sources have been said to inflate casualty numbers for opposing forces and downplay their own losses for morale. [ 496 ] leaked us documents say "under-reporting of casualties within the [russian] system highlights the military's 'continuing reluctance' to convey bad news up the chain of command." [ 497 ] russian news outlets have largely stopped reporting the russian death toll. [ 498 ] russia and ukraine have admitted suffering "significant" [ 499 ] and "considerable" losses, respectively. [ 500 ] [ 501 ] the numbers of civilian and military deaths have been impossible to determine precisely. [ 502 ] agence france-presse (afp) reported that neither it nor independent conflict monitors could verify russian and ukrainian claims of enemy losses and suspected they were inflated. [ 503 ] in october 2022, the independent russian media project istories , citing sources close to the kremlin, reported that more than 90,000 russian soldiers had been killed, seriously wounded, or gone missing. [ 504 ] while combat deaths can be inferred from a variety of sources, including satellite imagery of military action, measuring civilian deaths is more difficult. in june 2022, the ukrainian minister of defence told cnn that tens of thousands of ukrainians had died, and he hoped the death toll was below 100,000. [ 505 ] by july 2024, about 20,000 ukrainians had lost limbs. [ 506 ] in the destroyed city of mariupol, ukrainian officials believe at least 25,000 have been killed, [ 507 ] [ 508 ] and bodies were still being discovered in september 2022. [ 509 ] the mayor said over 10,000 and possibly as many as 20,000 civilians died in the siege of mariupol and russian forces had brought mobile cremation equipment with them when they entered the city. [ 510 ] [ 511 ] [ 512 ] an investigation by ap from the end of 2022 estimated up to 75,000 killed civilians in the mariupol area alone. [ 513 ] [ 514 ] afp says "a key gap in casualty counts is the lack of information from russian-occupied places like the port city of mariupol, where tens of thousands of civilians are believed to have died". [ 515 ] there were at least 8,000 excess deaths in mariupol between march 2022-february 2023. [ 516 ] the office of the united nations high commissioner for human rights (ohchr) reports similar issues and believed the true civilian casualty numbers were significantly higher than it has been able to confirm. [ 517 ] in the russian military, ethnic minorities have suffered disproportionately high casualties. in october 2022, the russian regions with the highest death tolls were dagestan , tuva and buryatia , all minority regions. in february 2024, six out of ten russian regions with the highest mortality rates in ukraine were located in siberia and the far east, and ethnic minorities continuing outsized casualty rates prompted analysts to warn that the situation will lead to long-term destructive impacts on these communities. [ 518 ] [ 519 ] [ 520 ] [ 521 ] [ 522 ] about 1,200 russian soldiers were killed or wounded in ukraine every day in may-june 2024, [ 523 ] which climbed to 1,500 by november 2024, when 45,690 casualties were estimated that month. [ 524 ] newsweek estimated that on the bloodiest day in november 2024 the ratio of killed russian men (1,950) exceeded the average daily male birth rate in russia (1,836). [ 525 ] latvia-based news outlet meduza estimated that up to 140,000 russian soldiers had died by july 2024. [ 526 ] the russian invasion became the deadliest european war in the last 80 years, [ 527 ] surpassing the bosnian war . [ 528 ] ukrainian average mortality rate was 8.7/1000 people in 2020, [ 529 ] and jumped to 18.6 in 2024, whereas russia's mortality rate was 14/1000, ranking them as #1 and #9, of countries with the highest mortality rates. [ 530 ] in august 2024, haaretz estimated 172,000 people had died in the russian invasion. [ 531 ] in february 2025, quincy institute for responsible statecraft estimated 250,000 dead. [ 532 ] in september 2024, the wall street journal reported that there were now one million ukrainians and russians who were killed or wounded; [ 533 ] it noted how the number of casualties impacts the countries' shrinking prewar populations. [ 533 ] during the invasion, the russian military and authorities have been responsible for deliberate attacks against civilian targets [ 550 ] (including strikes on hospitals and on the energy grid ), massacres of civilians, abduction and torture of civilians, sexual violence , [ 551 ] forced deportation of civilians, and torture and murder of ukrainian prisoners of war. they have also carried out many indiscriminate attacks in densely populated areas, including with cluster bombs , in once instance killing 61 people in the kramatorsk railway station attack . [ 552 ] [ 553 ] [ 554 ] [ 202 ] according to kyrylo budanov , the chief of the ukrainian intelligence, russia before the start of the invasion of ukraine had created 'execution lists' of ukrainian teachers, journalists, scientists, writers, priests, politicians and was preparing for a genocide of ukrainians, also the plans included locations of mass graves and mobile crematoriums . [ 555 ] according to the office of the united nations high commissioner for human rights, by december 2023, about 78% of confirmed civilian casualties had been killed in ukrainian-controlled territory, while 21% had been killed in russian-occupied territory. [ 556 ] over 12,300 civilians have been killed since the start of the invasion. [ 557 ] russia has deliberately targeted ukrainian civilians with drones, such as in the kherson terror campaign dubbed the human safari . [ 558 ] [ 559 ] [ 560 ] a representative from the kherson military administration said nearly half of the 547 casualties reported from 1 july to 9 september 2024 were caused by drones. [ 561 ] the un human rights office reports that russia is committing severe human rights violations in occupied ukraine , including arbitrary detentions , enforced disappearances , torture, crackdown on protests and freedom of speech , enforced russification , indoctrination of children, and suppression of ukrainian language and culture. [ 562 ] ukrainians have been coerced into taking russian passports and becoming russian citizens. those who refuse are denied healthcare and other rights, [ 562 ] and can be imprisoned as a "foreign citizen". ukrainian men who take russian citizenship are drafted to fight against the ukrainian army. [ 563 ] russian forces have reportedly used banned chemical weapons during the war, usually tear gas grenades. [ 564 ] [ 565 ] in april 2024, a daily telegraph investigation concluded that "russian troops are carrying out a systematic campaign of illegal chemical attacks against ukrainian soldiers". [ 566 ] a 25 august 2022 report by the humanitarian research lab of the yale school of public health identified some 21 filtration camps for ukrainian "civilians, pows, and other personnel" in the vicinity of donetsk oblast. imaging of one camp, olenivka prison , found two sites featuring disturbed earth consistent with "potential graves". [ 567 ] kaveh khoshnood, a professor at the yale school of public health, said: "incommunicado detention of civilians is more than a violation of international humanitarian law—it represents a threat to the public health of those currently in the custody of russia and its proxies." conditions described by freed prisoners include exposure, insufficient access to sanitation, food and water, cramped conditions, electrical shocks and physical assault. [ 567 ] an ohchr report released in november 2022 documented abuses on both sides. the report was based on interviews with prisoners who spoke of abuses and ill-treatment. [ 568 ] in march 2023, un human rights commissioner volker türk reported that more than 90% of the ukrainian pows interviewed by his office said they had been tortured or ill-treated, including ″welcoming beatings″ on their arrival in penitentiary facilities, which russia despite several requests did not give un staff access to. [ 569 ] in april 2023, several videos started circulating on different websites purportedly showing russian soldiers beheading ukrainian soldiers. [ 570 ] [ 571 ] in march 2024, the united nations issued a report saying russia may have executed more than 30 recently captured ukrainian prisoners of war over the winter months. the un human rights office verified three incidents in which russian servicemen executed seven ukrainian servicemen. according to the same report, 39 of 60 released ukrainian prisoners of war also "disclosed that they had been subjected to sexual violence during their internment, including attempted rape, threats of rape and castration, beatings or the administration of electric shocks to genitals, and repeated forced nudity, including during interrogations and to check for tattoos". [ 572 ] in october 2024, the eeas released a statement describing the increasing frequency of russian executions of ukrainian prisoners, with at least 177 prisoners dying in russian captivity since the beginning of the war. the statement also included the office of the united nations high commissioner for human rights (ohchr)'s confirmation of systematic use of a wide range of different methods of torture used by russians against ukrainian prisoners. [ 573 ] the ukrainian armed forces have also been accused of executions and other abuses of russian prisoners of war, but the number of such allegations has been significantly lower. [ 574 ] : para. 105 [ 575 ] [ 576 ] [ 577 ] in june 2024, an investigation by the financial times identified four ukrainian children on a russian government-linked adoption website that had been abducted from state care homes. the children's ukrainian background was not mentioned. one child was shown with a new russian name and age that differed from their ukrainian documents, another was shown using a russian version of their ukrainian name. 17 other matches identified by the financial times on the adoption website were also confirmed as ukrainian children in a recent new york times investigation. ukrainian authorities estimate that nearly 20,000 ukrainian children have been forcibly taken from occupied territories to russia since the full-scale invasion began. wayne jordash, president of humanitarian law firm global rights compliance, described forcibly transferring or deporting children as war crimes, adding that when done as part of a widespread or systematic attack on a civilian population, russia is also committing crimes against humanity. [ 578 ] [ 579 ] in march 2025, the isw said that by the time the invasion started, russia had already laid the groundwork for massive deportation of ukrainian children, with putin recognizing depriving ukraine of its multigenerational potential a way to dominate the ukrainian people. isw cited kremlin documents uncovered by ukrainian human rights activists dated 18 february 2022, describing plans to move ukrainian children from orphanages in occupied donetsk and luhansk oblasts to russia under ″humanitarian evacuations″, particularly planning to target vulnerable children without parental care. in the years following the invasion, russia has embarked on a deeply institutionalized project to abduct and forcibly give ukrainian children a russian identity. international law explicitly forbids this kind of forcible transfer of children, and constituent moving children for the purpose of damaging a national or ethnic group as an act of genocide. [ 580 ] the international criminal court (icc) opened an investigation into possible crimes against humanity , genocide and war crimes committed in ukraine. [ 581 ] on 17 march 2023, the icc issued a warrant for putin's arrest, charging him with individual criminal responsibility in the abduction of children forcibly deported to russia. [ 582 ] it was the first time that the icc had issued an arrest warrant for the head of state of a permanent member of the united nations security council [ 582 ] (the world's five principal nuclear powers). [ 583 ] moscow has denied any involvement in war crimes, a response vittorio bufacchi of university college cork says "has bordered on the farcical", [ 584 ] and its contention that the images coming out of bucha were fabricated "a disingenuous response born by delusional hubris, post-truth on overdrive, (that) does not merit to be taken seriously." even the usually fractured united states senate came together to call putin a war criminal. [ 585 ] one of several efforts to document russian war crimes concerns its repeated bombardment of markets and bread lines, destruction of basic infrastructure and attacks on exports and supply convoys, in a country where deliberate starvation of ukrainians by soviets the holodomor still looms large in public memory. [ 586 ] forcible deportation of populations, such as took place in mariupol, is another area of focus, since, [ 587 ] forced deportations and transfers are defined both as war crimes under the fourth geneva convention and protocol ii and article 8 of the rome statute—and as crimes against humanity—under article 7 of the rome statute . as both war crimes and crimes against humanity , they have several mechanisms for individual accountability, the international criminal court and also, at the individual state level, universal jurisdiction and magnitsky sanctions legislation. the icc also issued arrest warrants for military officials sergey kobylash , viktor sokolov , sergei shoigu and valery gerasimov . [ 588 ] [ 589 ] the humanitarian impact of the invasion has been extensive and has included negative impacts on international food supplies and the 2022 food crises . [ 590 ] an estimated 6.6 million ukrainians were internally displaced by august 2022, and about the same number were refugees in other countries. [ 591 ] the invasion has devastated the cultural heritage of ukraine, [ 592 ] with over 500 ukrainian cultural heritage sites, including cultural centres, theatres, museums, and churches, affected by "russian aggression". ukraine's minister of culture oleksandr tkachenko called it cultural genocide . [ 593 ] deliberate destruction and looting of ukrainian cultural heritage sites in this way is considered a war crime . [ 594 ] the russian attacks on civilians, causing mass civilian casualties and displacement, have been characterised as genocide and democide . [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] on 15 september 2023, a un-mandated investigative body presented their findings that russian occupiers had tortured ukrainians so brutally that some of their victims died, and forced families to listen as they raped women next door. [ 595 ] [ 28 ] the commission has previously said that violations committed by russian forces in ukraine, including the use of torture, may constitute crimes against humanity. [ 596 ] a report by physicians for human rights described russian violence against the ukrainian health care system as being a prominent feature of russia's conduct during the war, documenting 707 attacks on ukraine's health care system between 24 february and 31 december 2022. such attacks are considered war crimes. [ 597 ] the war has caused the largest refugee and humanitarian crisis in europe since the yugoslav wars in the 1990s; [ 598 ] [ 599 ] the un described it as the fastest growing such crisis since world war ii. [ 600 ] as russia built up military forces along the ukrainian border, many neighbouring governments and aid organisations prepared for a mass displacement event in the weeks before the invasion. in december 2021, the ukrainian defence minister estimated that an invasion could force three to five million people to flee their homes. [ 601 ] in the first week of the invasion, the un reported over a million refugees had fled ukraine; this subsequently reached over eight million by 31 january 2023. [ 602 ] [ 603 ] on 20 may 2022, npr reported that, following a significant influx of foreign military equipment into ukraine, a significant number of refugees were seeking to return to regions in ukraine which were relatively isolated from the invasion front in southeastern ukraine. [ 604 ] by 3 may, another 8 million people were displaced inside ukraine. [ 605 ] most refugees were women, children, elderly, or disabled. [ 606 ] most male ukrainian nationals aged 18 to 60 were denied exit from ukraine as part of mandatory conscription , [ 607 ] unless they were responsible for the financial support of three or more children, single fathers, or were the parent/guardian of children with disabilities. [ 608 ] many ukrainian men, including teenagers, opted to remain in ukraine voluntarily to join the resistance. [ 609 ] according to the un high commission for refugees as of 13 may 2022, there were 3,315,711 refugees in poland, 901,696 in romania, 594,664 in hungary, 461,742 in moldova, 415,402 in slovakia, and 27,308 in belarus, while russia reported it had received over 800,104 refugees. [ 602 ] by 13 july 2022, over 390,000 ukrainian refugees had arrived in the czech republic, where the average refugee was a woman accompanied by one child. these refugees were twice as likely to have a college degree as the czech population as a whole. [ 610 ] turkey has been another significant destination, registering more than 58,000 ukrainian refugees as of 22 march 2022. [ 611 ] the eu invoked the temporary protection directive for the first time in its history, granting ukrainian refugees the right to live and work in the eu for up to three years. [ 612 ] britain has accepted 146,379 refugees, as well as extending the ability to remain in the uk for three years with broadly similar entitlements as the eu, three years residency and access to state welfare and services. [ 613 ] according to the organization for security and co-operation in europe (osce), russia has engaged in "massive deportation" of over 1.3 million ukrainian civilians, potentially constituting crimes against humanity. [ 614 ] the osce and ukraine have accused russia of forcibly moving civilians to filtration camps in russian-held territory, and then into russia. ukrainian sources have compared this policy to soviet-era population transfers and russian actions in the chechen war of independence . [ 615 ] for instance, as of 8 april 2022, russia claimed to have evacuated about 121,000 mariupol residents to russia. [ 615 ] also, on 19 october, russia announced the forced deportation of 60,000 civilians from areas around the line of contact in kherson oblast. [ 616 ] ria novosti and ukrainian officials said that thousands were dispatched to various centres in cities in russia and russian-occupied ukraine, [ 617 ] from which people were sent to economically depressed regions of russia. [ 618 ] in april, ukraine's national security and defence council secretary oleksiy danilov said that russia planned to build "concentration camps" for ukrainians in western siberia, and likely planned to force prisoners to build new cities in siberia. [ 619 ] [ f ] both russia and ukraine faced the prospect of significant population decline even before the war, having among the lowest fertility rates worldwide and considerable emigration. it is the first time that two countries with an average age above 40 have gone to war against each other. [ 621 ] russia had a fighting-age (18-to-40-year-old) male population more than four times higher than ukraine's and slightly higher birth rates, while the willingness to fight was more pronounced in ukraine. [ 622 ] several sources have pointed out that the war is considerably worsening ukraine's demographic crisis, making significant shrinking very likely. [ 623 ] a july 2023 study by the vienna institute for international economic studies stated that, [ 624 ] regardless of how long the war lasts and whether or not there is further military escalation, ukraine is unlikely to recover demographically from the consequences of the war. even in 2040 it will have only about 35 million inhabitants, around 20% fewer than before the war (2021: 42.8 million) and the decline in the working-age population is likely to be the most severe and far-reaching. the study took different scenarios, from a "best case" (end of the war in 2023 without much further escalation) to a "worst case" (end of the war in 2025 with further escalation) into account. flight from war affected especially the southern and eastern regions and especially educated women of child-bearing age and their children. with an estimate of more than 20% of refugees not returning, study author maryna tverdostup concluded that long-term shrinking will significantly impair the conditions for reconstruction. [ 624 ] the war in ukraine and the associated emigration, lower birth rates and war-related casualties further deepened the demographic crisis of russia . [ 625 ] many commentators predict that the situation will be worse than during the 1990s. [ 626 ] the un is projecting that the decline that started in 2021 will continue, and if current demographic conditions persist, russia's population would be 120 million in fifty years, a decline of about 17%. [ 627 ] [ 628 ] since february 2022, hundreds of thousands of russians have emigrated ; estimates range from 370,000 to over 820,000. combined with mobilisation, this possibly removed roughly half a million to one million working-age males from russia's population. [ 629 ] studies report that this will have a demographic effect, especially in russia, that lasts much longer than the conflict, and putin's time in office. [ 630 ] they come from different walks of life. some are journalists like us, but there are also it experts, designers, artists, academics, lawyers, doctors, pr specialists, and linguists. most are under 50. many share western liberal values and hope russia will be a democratic country one day. some are lgbtq+. sociologists studying the current russian emigration say there is evidence that those leaving are younger, better educated and wealthier than those staying. more often they are from bigger cities. according to johannes wachs, "the exodus of skilled human capital, sometimes called brain drain , out of russia may have a significant effect on the course of the war and the russian economy in the long run." [ 632 ] according to a survey, around 15 percent of those who left returned to russia, either permanently or to settle their affairs. [ 633 ] in november 2023, at the world russian people's council , putin urged russian women to have eight or more children amid increasing russian casualties in the invasion. [ 634 ] in july 2024, chief of the general staff of the british army roland walker said that with the current way of fighting, it would take russia five years to control the four oblasts of donetsk, luhansk, kherson and zaporizhzhia that russia claims as its own, and it would cost russia from 1.5 to 1.8 million casualties. [ 635 ] he said there are "no winners" in russia's invasion, adding "it is an utter devastation for both sides and lost generations." [ 636 ] based on a preliminary assessment, the war has inflicted $51 billion in environmental damage in ukraine; according to a report by the yale school of the environment , some 623,000 tonnes (1.4 billion pounds) of petrochemicals have burned as a result of shelling, while nearly 1,500 tonnes (3.2 million pounds) of pollutants have leaked into bodies of water. hazardous chemicals have contaminated around 28 hectares (70 acres) of soil, and likely made agricultural activities temporarily impossible. [ 637 ] around 30% of ukraine's land is now littered with explosives and more than 2.4 million hectares (5.9 million acres) of forest have been damaged. [ 638 ] according to netherlands-based peace organisation pax, russia's "deliberate targeting of industrial and energy infrastructure" has caused "severe" pollution, and the use of explosive weapons has left "millions of tonnes" of contaminated debris in cities and towns. [ 639 ] in early june 2023, the kakhovka dam , under russian occupation, was damaged , causing flooding and triggering warnings of an "ecological disaster". [ 640 ] the ukrainian government, international observers and journalists have described the damage as ecocide . [ 641 ] the ukrainian government is investigating more crimes against the environment and ecocide (a crime in ukraine). [ 642 ] zelenskyy has met with prominent european figures ( heidi hautala , margot wallstrom , mary robinson and greta thunberg ) to discuss the environmental damage and how to prosecute it. [ 643 ] according to an investigation by ngl media published in april 2024, russia has completely destroyed over 60,000 hectares (150,000 acres) of ukrainian forests. the investigation stated that long-term ecological consequences may include lowering of the groundwater level, reduction of biodiversity, worsening of air quality, fire outbreaks, and rivers and ponds drying up. [ 644 ] the war in ukraine has severely disrupted climate policy all over the world and increased co2 emissions. [ 645 ] [ 646 ] the effects have been strongly felt in asia, [ 647 ] [ 648 ] [ 649 ] europe, [ 650 ] and the us. [ 651 ] fatih birol , the head of the international energy agency talking about the prospects of cop 28 noted: [ 652 ] ... the geopolitical situation, with many nations at loggerheads over the war in ukraine , and still frosty relations between the us and china , would make for a difficult summit. [...] the most important challenge [to limiting temperature rises to 1.5 °c (2.7 °f) above pre-industrial levels] is the lack of international cooperation . throughout the war, putin implied that russia may use nuclear weapons if certain "red lines" were to be crossed. by 2024, most of the russian government's "red lines" had been crossed without nuclear weapons being used in response. [ 653 ] four days into the invasion, putin put russia's nuclear forces on high alert, raising fears that russia could use tactical nuclear weapons against ukraine. [ 654 ] in response to what he called "completely irresponsible actions", zelenskyy suggested that there should be "global control" of russia's nuclear assets. [ 655 ] in march 2023, putin announced plans to install russian tactical nuclear weapons in belarus. [ 656 ] the invasion had an impact on ukraine's nuclear power plants . russian forces captured chernobyl on the first day, leading to a huge spike in radiation levels. [ 657 ] russia also captured zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant , the largest in europe, and which has since been at risk and damaged by shelling. in august 2022, zelenskyy described the situation as "russian nuclear terror ". [ 658 ] the international atomic energy agency said it was the first time a military conflict occurred amid nuclear plants, and it called for a demilitarised zone around zaporizhzhia npp. [ 659 ] ukrainian minister of economic development and trade yulia svyrydenko announced that for 2022 ukraine had a 30.4% loss in their gdp. [ 660 ] the international monetary fund predicted that ukraine's gross domestic product (gdp) would suffer a decrease from a minimum of 10% to a maximum of 35%; [ 661 ] the european bank for reconstruction and development also predicted that the invasion would cause a 20% decrease of ukraine's gdp. [ 662 ] the ukrainian statistics service said that the gdp of ukraine in 2023 grew by 5.3%. [ 663 ] ukraine began issuing war bonds on 1 march 2022, and the following day the ukrainian government announced that they had raised 6.14 billion hryvnias. [ 664 ] a ban was placed in may 2022 by the european commission on grain sales in the countries of: bulgaria, poland, hungary, romania and slovakia with the only exception being if they were transiting through those countries with the ban being lifted in september 2023. [ 665 ] the war has caused a major humanitarian crisis in ukraine: the united nations development programme calculated in march 2022 that a prolonged conflict would cause 30% of the ukrainian population to fall below the poverty line, while a further 62% would be at risk of also falling into poverty within a year. [ 666 ] the russian economic ministry said that for 2022 the gdp contracted by 2.1% [ 667 ] and for 2023 russia's government said the gdp grew by 3.6%. [ 668 ] a price cap was placed on russian oil by the group of 7 (g7) at $60 on 5 december 2022. [ 669 ] the united states banned all imports of russian oil on 8 march 2022. [ 670 ] the european union placed an embargo on oil products from russia on 5 february 2023. [ 669 ] other countries that embargoed russian oil included five eyes partners canada, the united kingdom, australia and new zealand. [ 671 ] russia itself issued a ban on foreign diesel sales starting on 21 september 2023, before being lifted on 6 october. [ 672 ] on 27 april 2024, it was reported that russia was planning increases in personal income taxes and corporate taxes to help pay for the war. [ 673 ] in january 2025, it was reported that, since early 2022, russia had used a two-prong strategy to finance the extremely large costs of the war. in addition to the official russian government defense budget —direct financial expenditure for waging the war in ukraine was estimated at us$250 billion through june 2024 for military spending through normal channels, [ 22 ] with the military budget rising to over 20% of annual gdp—an additional off-budget financing mechanism was employed to fund the war with over us$200 billion of debt funding obtained from preferential bank loans made to defence contractors and war-related businesses, loans that had been compelled by the russian government. [ 23 ] [ 24 ] peace negotiations between russia and ukraine took place on 28 february , 3 march , and 7 march 2022 , on the belarus–ukraine border , with further talks held on 10 march in turkey and a fourth round of negotiations beginning 14 march. [ 674 ] the talks ended without agreement. as of 2024, [ needs update ] ukraine's main peace terms are that russia withdraw its troops, that ukrainian prisoners be released, that russian leaders be prosecuted for war crimes , and that ukraine be given security guarantees to prevent further aggression. russia's main terms are that russia must keep all the land it occupies , that it also be given all of the provinces that it claims but does not fully control, that ukraine end plans to join nato, and that sanctions against russia be lifted. [ 676 ] according to several western sources, allowing russia to keep the land it seized would "reward the aggressor while punishing the victim" and set a dangerous precedent. [ 677 ] they predict that this would allow russia to re-arm and encourage it "to continue its imperialist campaign of expansionism" against ukraine and its other neighbors, and embolden other expansionist regimes. [ 677 ] [ 678 ] [ 679 ] [ 680 ] after donald trump became us president in 2025, there was a major shift in us policy. the trump administration began negotiations with russia and separately with ukraine. the invasion received widespread international condemnation from governments and intergovernmental organisations . [ 681 ] on 2 march 2022 and on 23 february 2023, 141 member states of the un general assembly voted for a resolution saying that russia should immediately withdraw. seven, including russia, voted against the measure. [ 682 ] political reactions to the invasion included new sanctions imposed on russia , which triggered widespread economic effects on the russian and world economies . [ 683 ] sanctions forced russia to reorient its oil exports to non-sanctioning countries such as india, rely more on lng (which was not subject to european union sanctions), and shift its coal exports from europe to asia. [ 684 ] most european countries cancelled nuclear cooperation with russia. [ 685 ] over seventy sovereign states and the european union delivered humanitarian aid to ukraine, and nearly fifty countries plus the eu provided military aid . [ 686 ] economic sanctions included a ban on russian aircraft using eu airspace, [ 687 ] a ban of certain russian banks from the swift international payments system , and a ban on certain russian media outlets. [ 688 ] reactions to the invasion have included public response, media responses, peace efforts , and the examination of the legal implications of the invasion . some countries, particularly in the global south , saw public sympathy or outright support for russia, due in part to distrust of us foreign policy . [ 689 ] protests and demonstrations were held worldwide, including some in russia and parts of ukraine occupied by russia . [ 690 ] calls for a boycott of russian goods spread on social media platforms, [ 691 ] while hackers attacked russian websites, particularly those operated by the russian government. [ 692 ] anti-russian sentiment against russians living abroad surged after the invasion. [ 693 ] in march 2022, russian president putin introduced prison sentences of up to 15 years for publishing "fake news" about russian military operations, [ 694 ] intended to suppress any criticism related to the war. [ 695 ] according to the economist intelligence unit in 2023, 31 percent of the world's population live in countries that are leaning towards or supportive of russia, 30.7 percent live in neutral countries, and 36.2 percent live in countries that are against russia in some way. [ 696 ] a number of supranational and national parliaments passed resolutions declaring russia to be a state sponsor of terrorism . [ 697 ] by october 2022, three countries—latvia, lithuania and estonia—had declared russia a terrorist state . [ 698 ] on 1 august 2023, iceland became the first european country to close its embassy in russia as a result of the invasion of ukraine. [ 699 ] the invasion prompted ukraine, [ 700 ] finland and sweden to officially apply for nato membership. [ 701 ] finland became a member of nato on 4 april 2023, [ 702 ] followed by sweden on 7 march 2024. [ 703 ] a documentary film produced during the siege of mariupol, 20 days in mariupol , won the oscar for best documentary in 2024. [ 704 ]

this timeline of the russian invasion of ukraine covers the period from 1 january 2025 to the present day. a drone attack in kyiv killed two people and injured at least six others, and also damaged the main building of the national bank of ukraine . [ 1 ] ukrainian commander-in-chief oleksandr syrskyi claimed that russia had lost some 38,000 soldiers in kursk , while 700 others were captured and over 1,000 pieces of equipment destroyed. [ 2 ] one person was killed in a russian airstrike on stepnohirsk , zaporizhzhia oblast . [ 3 ] geo-located footage confirmed russia's control over the village of vozdvyzhenka in donetsk oblast . [ 4 ] a ukrainian strike against ivanovskoye in kursk oblast reportedly killed seven russian servicemen. [ 5 ] ukrainian authorities announced an investigation following reports that hundreds of soldiers had defected from the 155th mechanized brigade during training in france. [ 6 ] one person was killed in a russian drone strike in kyiv oblast . [ 7 ] one person was killed in a missile attack on chernihiv . [ 8 ] russian captain konstantin nagayko was critically wounded in an explosion in ivanovo oblast , russia according to the hur . he was a battery commander in the 112th missile brigade , 1st tank army of the western military district of russia, the unit accused of killing 59 civilians in the 2023 hroza missile attack in kharkiv oblast . [ 9 ] a ukrainian military observer said that russian forces captured the village of shevchenko [ uk ] , west of stari terny , and the kurakhove power station . [ 10 ] geo-located footage showed that russian forces captured the village of vovkove , south of pokrovsk . [ 5 ] a drone attack caused a two-hour suspension of operations at pulkovo airport in saint petersburg . [ 11 ] the drones attacked the seaport at ust-luga , damaging a window. four drones were downed over leningrad oblast with "electronic warfare and firearms" according to the local governor. [ 12 ] alexander martemyanov , a russian freelance reporter, was killed by a ukrainian drone while returning from reporting in horlivka , donetsk oblast. four other media workers were also injured according to ria novosti . [ 13 ] [ 14 ] the russian defense ministry claimed to have shot down eight us-made atacms missiles and 72 uavs launched by ukraine in russian territory, with some drones being shot down in leningrad and kursk oblasts . [ 15 ] russian forces claimed to have captured the village of vodiane druhe , east of pokrovsk. [ 5 ] the 155th mechanized brigade was effectively disbanded, with remaining elements assigned to other brigades. [ 16 ] ukrainian forces launched a renewed offensive "in several directions" in kursk oblast. russian milbloggers claimed that russian forces repulsed attacks in two of these directions. the russian defense ministry said that at 09:00 moscow time , ukrainian forces started attacking from their bases in sudzha towards the villages of berdin and bolshoye soldatskoye consisting of two tanks, one counter-obstacle vehicle, and 12 armoured fighting vehicles. [ 17 ] [ 18 ] later russian sources claimed that ukrainian forces captured the settlements of cherkasskoye porechnoye , martynovka , and mikhaylovka . [ 19 ] geo-located footage showed that russian forces likely captured the villages of svyrydonivka and tymofiivka near pokrovsk and the village of petropavlivka near stari terny. [ 19 ] the hur issued a report claiming that the ukrainian kraken unit killed the chief of staff of the storm ossetia battalion, sergei melnikov , and his driver using drones along the vasylivka - tokmak highway in zaporizhzhia oblast. [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] ukrainian president volodymyr zelenskyy claimed 3,800 north korean soldiers have been killed or wounded out of the original 12,000 sent to fight ukrainian forces. [ 23 ] one person was killed in a russian drone strike on a bus in kherson . [ 24 ] russian forces claimed to have taken kurakhove . [ 25 ] [ 26 ] russian sources claimed that ukrainian forces took the village of russkoye porechnoye in kursk oblast. [ 27 ] ukraine claimed to have destroyed or damaged two russian pantsir-s1 anti-aircraft missile systems and one osa anti-aircraft vehicle using sea-launched aerial drones in occupied kherson oblast . [ 28 ] the sbu said it had discovered a russian plot to bomb a military installation in kyiv oblast by hiring a 16-year-old boy to deliver explosives, leading to the arrest of four suspects. [ 29 ] ukrainian forces conducted a "precision strike" on the headquarters of the russian 810th guards naval infantry brigade in belaya, kursk oblast . [ 30 ] in kursk oblast, russian milbloggers claimed that russian forces recaptured the hamlets of staraya sorochina [ ru ] , kositsa [ ru ] and berdin , and the villages of russkoye porechnoye , makhnovka and novosotnitskii [ ru ] . [ 31 ] thirteen people were killed in a russian airstrike on an industrial facility in zaporizhzhia . [ 32 ] ukrainian forces attacked the kristal oil depot in engels, saratov oblast , [ 33 ] supplying fuel to the engels-2 air base and russian strategic bombers based there. [ 34 ] approximately 800,000 tons of jet fuel was reportedly destroyed by the fire. [ 35 ] ukrainian special forces destroyed various russian equipment in donetsk oblast with drones, including a pole-21 electronic warfare system, which is used to disrupt gps signals. [ 36 ] ukrainian forces also claimed to have bombed a command post of the russian 8th combined arms army in khartsyzk . [ 37 ] two paratroopers from the ukrainian 79th separate air assault brigade reportedly captured 14 russian soldiers after throwing grenades at their dugout. [ 38 ] ukrainian officials confirmed that russian forces had established a bridgehead across the oskil river in kharkiv oblast near dvorichna . [ 39 ] in kursk oblast, geo-located footage showed that russian forces captured the hamlets of alexandriya, kursk oblast [ ru ] and leonidovo, kursk oblast [ ru ] . russian milbloggers claimed that russian forces captured the village of pogrebki [ ru ] . [ 40 ] at the ramstein meeting, norway pledged a military aid package of 2 billion euros for ukraine over 2025. canada pledged $330 million in military aid, while the us announced an aid package of $500 million. the uk announced it, and other allies, would send 30,000 fpv drones to ukraine. germany would deliver 6 iris-t launchers as well. [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] zelenskyy claimed north korea lost 4,000 soldiers killed and wounded. [ 44 ] russian-installed authorities in donetsk oblast claimed that three people were killed in ukrainian airstrikes in donetsk city and svitlodarsk . [ 45 ] the ukrainian military claimed it had carried out a strike on a command post of the russian 3rd army corps in svitlodarsk. [ 46 ] a ukrainian drone and neptune missile attack hit a russian ammunition depot in the village of chaltyr , rostov oblast , according to the hur. other drone attacks were reported in leningrad oblast, [ 47 ] with one strike causing a fire at an industrial area in gatchina that burned 1,900 square meters. [ 48 ] the ukrainian ministry of defence said that the polish-trained ukrainian legion had received 1,300 applications from ukrainians living abroad wanting to join, including women. [ 49 ] russian forces claimed to have captured the villages of baranivka, donetsk oblast [ uk ] , east of pokrovsk and yasenove , southwest of pokrovsk. [ 50 ] russian officials claimed that three people were injured after a drone crashed into an apartment in kotovsk , tambov oblast . [ 51 ] zelenskyy claimed that two north korean soldiers had been captured in kursk oblast. [ 52 ] ukrainian drones attacked the russian port of novorossiysk , causing a massive fire. [ 53 ] an oil-processing plant in tatarstan , russia was struck by ukrainian drones, prompting evacuations. [ 54 ] syrskyi ordered the transfer of additional ukrainian air force personnel to ground infantry units, reportedly numbering 5,000 soldiers. [ 55 ] a ukrainian military observer claimed that russian forces took the village of hryhorivka , north of chasiv yar. [ 50 ] russian forces captured the village of neskuchne , south of velyka novosilka . [ 50 ] [ 56 ] russian forces claimed to have taken the villages of yantarne , ten kilometers southwest of kurakhove, kalynove, kharkiv oblast [ uk ] along the oskil river, [ 57 ] and zelene, donetsk oblast [ uk ] , south of pokrovsk. [ 58 ] russian-installed authorities in kherson oblast claimed that one person was killed and three others were injured in ukrainian drone strikes. [ 59 ] a russian source claimed that russian forces crossed the international border into sumy oblast and advanced south of the village of prokhody [ uk ] . [ 58 ] geo-located footage showed that russian forces had captured the village of pishchane , south of pokrovsk, and severed two highways leading east (to kostiantynivka ) and west (to mezhova ) out of pokrovsk. [ 56 ] russia accused ukraine of using drones to inflict minor damage on infrastructure of the turkstream gas pipeline near gaikodzor , krasnodar krai . [ 60 ] ukraine received its first rch 155 from germany. [ 61 ] south korean intelligence claimed that 300 north koreans had been killed and 2,700 wounded in kursk oblast. [ 62 ] lithuania announced 4,500 drones would be sent to ukraine. [ 63 ] reuters , citing unnamed industry sources, reported that the pokrovs'ke coal mine had halted production due to the approaching front line. the mine was ukraine's sole coking coal -producing facility, from which 3.5 million tons of coke were produced in 2023. [ 64 ] an unidentified north korean surface to air missile system similar to the russian tor missile system was destroyed by a russian drone in what appeared to be a friendly fire incident. [ 65 ] [ self-published source? ] drones attacked the town of aleksin in tula oblast . ten explosions were heard. other attacks occurred in bryansk oblast , belgorod oblast and crimea . [ 66 ] ukrainian drones attacked the kristal oil depot in engels after a fire that burnt for five days was extinguished. however the regional governor said only that an "industrial facility" had been hit. [ 67 ] drones struck the kazanorgsintez industrial facility in kazan , tatarstan, causing a fire. [ 68 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces had captured terny in donetsk oblast. [ 69 ] ukrainian drones struck a distillery in the village of novaya lyada , tambov oblast . local officials claimed a drone hit a tree and exploded. [ 70 ] russia launched another missile attack on energy infrastructure across ukraine, causing power grid shutdowns. [ 71 ] two critical infrastructure facilities in lviv oblast were struck. [ 72 ] lukoil 's oil refinery in volgograd caught fire. local officials blamed the fire on "technical issues". however locals reported an explosion before the fire and speculated "something fell onto the plant". [ 73 ] zelenskyy announced a prisoner exchange with russia that resulted in the release of 25 ukrainians for the same number of russian pows. [ 74 ] [ 75 ] the liskinskaya oil depot in liski, voronezh oblast caught fire after a drone attack, according to alexander gusev , the local governor. [ 76 ] a russian air defense captain was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for the shooting-down of a russian mi-8 helicopter that was mistaken for a ukrainian drone over crimea in october 2023 that killed three people. [ 77 ] russian media said that drones targeted a gunpowder factory in kuz'mino-gat village, tambov oblast . air defence was activated and locals reported "aircraft-type uavs". [ 78 ] the ukrainian military claimed it launched a drone strike on the liskinskaya oil depot in voronezh oblast [ 79 ] and destroyed radar equipment belonging to an s-400 air defense system in belgorod oblast. [ 80 ] the state border guard service of ukraine received a 155-mm dita self-propelled artillery howitzer from the czech republic. [ 81 ] british prime minister keir starmer visited kyiv and announced £4.5 billion (€5.34 billion) in aid, including 150 artillery barrels made in the uk and 15 additional gravehawk air defence systems. [ 82 ] the united states declassified that it had provided substantial support for ukraine's drone industry, beginning in late 2022 including $1.5 billion in support for drone production sent in september 2024. [ 83 ] four people were killed in a russian missile attack on kryvyi rih . [ 84 ] russian forces captured the village of vremivka , west of velyka novosilka, and were confirmed to have captured yasenove , southwest by south ( swbs ) of pokrovsk. [ 85 ] ukrainian drones struck an oil depot in lyudinovo , kaluga oblast , with falling debris causing a fire. [ 86 ] according to the hur, partisans burned down two communications towers in krasnodar . [ 87 ] a russian missile strike on kyiv damaged residential buildings, the lukianivska metro station and the oldest mcdonald's outlet in ukraine, killing three people. [ 88 ] [ 89 ] ukrainian forces confirmed their withdrawal from the chasivoyarsk refractory plant in chasiv yar , adding that they launched an airstrike against russian forces inside the facility. [ 90 ] ukrainian drones struck an oil depot in uzlovaya , tula oblast, according to the hur and the local governor. [ 91 ] geolocated footage showed that russian forces had entered velyka novosilka from the east. [ 92 ] the sbu arrested two people in kyiv and kharkiv on suspicion of leading a spy network for russia. one of the suspects was an engineer of the kyiv metro . [ 93 ] zelenskyy signed a decree imposing sanctions on 18 pro-russian ukrainian individuals, including politicians yuriy boyko , nestor shufrych , and yevhen murayev . [ 94 ] the ukrainian military launched an investigation into its 156th mechanized brigade following "a number of significant shortcomings" that were raised over its leadership and performance during inspections. [ 95 ] syrskyi claimed that russian forces had suffered 434,000 casualties, including 150,000 killed, in 2024, which he said was "more than the previous two years of the war combined". [ 96 ] the liskinskaya oil depot was struck by ukrainian drones again. [ 97 ] the russian-installed governor of kherson oblast claimed that two people were killed in a ukrainian cluster munitions attack on a school near bekhtery [ uk ] . [ 98 ] a drone attack was reported in kazan, causing a fire in the aviastroitelny district and the closure of kazan international airport and begishevo airport in nizhnekamsk . [ 99 ] two ukrainian generals and a colonel were detained by the state bureau of investigation for alleged negligence that led to russia seizing territory in northern kharkiv oblast in may 2024. [ 100 ] the sbi also detained the commander of the 155th mechanized brigade for failing to report desertions from the unit and other violations. [ 101 ] geo-located footage showed that russian forces captured the village of kotlyne [ uk ] near pokrovsk. [ 102 ] ukrainian drones struck the smolensk aviation plant . seven explosions were reported and air defence was activated according to locals. the ukrainian military also claimed an attack on a command post of the russian 29th combined arms army in volnovakha , donetsk oblast. [ 103 ] [ 104 ] former television host max nazarov [ ru ] was arrested by ukrainian authorities on suspicion of spreading pro-russian propaganda on his youtube channel. [ 105 ] geo-located footage showed that russian forces captured the village of nikolayevo-darino in kursk oblast. russian forces claimed to have captured the village of zelenyi hai in eastern kharkiv oblast. [ 106 ] the sbu arrested the ukrainian army's chief psychiatrist, identified by local media as oleh druz , on corruption charges linked to his involvement in a panel that determined "whether individuals were fit for military service." authorities found $152,000 (£124,000) and €34,000 in cash in his house as well as other assets valued at $1 million (£813,000). [ 107 ] russian forces captured the village of novovasylivka in donetsk oblast. [ 108 ] russian forces also claimed to have taken the village of zapadne , four kilometers west of the oskil river in kharkiv oblast. [ 109 ] russian authorities ordered the evacuation of residents from the border village of terezovka [ ru ] in belgorod oblast amid ukrainian attacks. [ 110 ] the sbu arrested a lawyer from dnipro on suspicion of aiding a russian missile strike on the city in december 2023 that killed six people. [ 111 ] one person was killed in a russian missile attack on zaporizhzhia. [ 112 ] authorities ordered the evacuation of children and their families from 16 settlements in the kupiansk area amid russian attacks that left one person dead. [ 113 ] in russia, a fire broke out at the ryazan oil refinery during a drone strike, with ten drones reportedly shot down over the facility. [ 114 ] north korean forces began deploying mlrs disguised as civilian trucks in kursk oblast. [ 115 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces captured the village of solone, donetsk oblast [ uk ] , southwest of pokrovsk. [ 116 ] three people were killed in russian drone strikes on kyiv oblast . [ 117 ] ukraine launched 121 drones over thirteen regions in russia, which the latter claimed to have destroyed, including six in moscow oblast and one over moscow city. vnukovo and domodedovo airports were closed. a power station in kursk and a power plant was destroyed in ryazan, [ 118 ] while the kremniy el microchip plant microchip factory in bryansk oblast was damaged. [ 119 ] ukrainian authorities ordered the mandatory evacuation of children from more than 20 settlements in the areas of komar and kryvorizhzhia in donetsk oblast due to russian attacks. [ 120 ] the remains of 757 ukrainian soldiers killed in action were repatriated to ukraine in exchange for the remains of 49 russian soldiers. [ 121 ] us secretary of state marco rubio announced a stop on all us foreign aid awards for 90 days, with the exception of israel and egypt. according to politico it "appears to include funding for military assistance to ukraine". [ 122 ] ukrainian defense minister rustem umerov announced the non-renewal of the tenure of maryna bezrukova as head of the defense procurement agency (dpa), despite the dpa's board voting to extend her tenure, amid a dispute over the ministry's procurement of weapons. however, bezrukova refused to leave her position, while umerov also removed two members of the dpa board for supporting bezrukova. [ 123 ] the russian-installed head of kherson oblast claimed that three people were killed in a ukrainian cluster munitions attack on oleshky . [ 124 ] the sbu arrested a military cadet in lviv oblast on suspicion of spying for russia. [ 125 ] russian forces claimed to have captured the village of novoandriivka , south of pokrovsk. [ 126 ] a boat-mounted vampire missile equipped with apkws shot down a russian kh-59 cruise missile over the black sea. [ 127 ] russian forces claimed to have taken velyka novosilka [ 128 ] and nadiivka , south of pokrovsk. [ 129 ] the ryazan oil refinery was struck again by drones, causing a fire. [ 130 ] thirty-two ukrainian drones struck 5 regions in russia according to russian officials. russian air defences claimed to have downed all 32 over belgorod, kursk, oryol and tver oblasts. [ 131 ] the ukrainian air force claimed more than 200 shahed drones were destroyed in a drone attack on a warehouse in oryol oblast. [ 132 ] zelenskyy announced brigadier-general andriy hnatov would be replaced by major general mykhailo drapatyi as the commander of the khortytsia operational-strategic group operating in the eastern front. drapatyi will remain as commander of the ukrainian ground forces . [ 133 ] [ 134 ] the eu renewed sanctions against russia. [ 135 ] [ 136 ] the ryazan oil refinery ceased operations due to ukrainian drone strikes, according to reuters. [ 137 ] north korean soldiers withdrew from frontline positions in kursk oblast due to heavy losses, according to ukrainian soldiers. [ 138 ] ukrainian forces claimed to have destroyed an s-400 missile system during a "precision strike" at an undisclosed date and location unknown. [ 139 ] [ self-published source? ] two people were killed in a russian missile attack on mykolaiv . [ 140 ] debris from a russian drone damaged 36 cars of a vintage car museum in kyiv oblast as well as residential buildings. [ 141 ] russia claimed to have taken dvorichna in kharkiv oblast, located across the oskil river . [ 142 ] the ukrainian general staff posted a map confirming russia's control over novoandriivka , uspenivka and slovianka on the pokrovsk front . [ 143 ] two ukrainians working with the russian federal security service (fsb) were detained by the sbu for spying on ukrainian f-16 fighter jets. [ 144 ] dmytro klymenkov was dismissed as ukrainian deputy defense minister amid a dispute over the ministry's procurement of weapons. [ 145 ] the lukoil kstovo refinery in kstovo , nizhny novgorod oblast was heavily damaged after a fire broke out during a wave of drone attacks that also targeted smolensk , tver , and bryansk oblasts . [ 146 ] no casualties were reported by gleb nikitin , governor of nizhny novgorod, however drone debris started a fire in an enterprise at the kstovo industrial zone. [ 147 ] russian officials also claimed that the smolensk nuclear power plant was also targeted. [ 148 ] the governor of belgorod oblast claimed that two people were killed while two others were injured after a drone struck a house. flights were also suspended at kazan and pulkovo airports . [ 149 ] the russian defense ministry reported that two drones were shot down in murmansk oblast . [ 150 ] the moscow times , citing multiple sources from russia, ukraine and other european countries, reported that russian forces had taken chasiv yar . [ 151 ] ukrainian military officials denied the claim. [ 152 ] ukrainian media reported that the hur carried out a cyberattack on the russian gas firm gazprom and its subsidiary gazprom neft . [ 153 ] israel transferred some 90 patriot missiles to the united states, which were then to be transferred along with supporting equipment to ukraine. [ 154 ] bloomberg reported that russian oil shipments through the port of ust-luga were suspended due to an overnight strike by ukrainian drones. the sbu claimed the andreapol oil pumping station was struck. the is part of the baltic pipeline system-ii run by transneft , a russian state owned company. a fire and oil spill were reported. [ 155 ] fixed-wing uavs that dropped fab-250 bombs were used in the attack, indicating the usage of reusable drones instead of a "kamikaze-type". [ 156 ] nine people were killed in a russian missile attack on sumy . [ 157 ] a russian drone strike on an evacuation vehicle in pokrovsk injured three people including a british volunteer. [ 158 ] seven people were injured and historic buildings (including the bristol hotel and the philharmonic theater ) were damaged in a russian missile attack on odesa . [ 159 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have destroyed a russian command post in rylsk , kursk oblast in an airstrike. [ 160 ] according to russian locals an oil refinery in volgograd was targeted by ukrainian drones, causing a fire and an explosion. [ 161 ] sweden announced a military aid package worth 13.5 billion swedish kronor ($1.23 billion) for ukraine, the largest aid package thus far from sweden. [ 162 ] a russian missile attack on a residential building in poltava killed at least 14 people. [ 163 ] energy infrastructure in the city was struck in a separate attack. [ 164 ] one person was killed in a russian drone attack on kharkiv, while three police officers were killed in a separate attack in sumy oblast. [ 165 ] one person was killed in the bombing near a military enlistment office in rivne that was blamed on russia by the sbu. [ 166 ] russian forces claimed to have taken the village of krymske , northeast of toretsk . [ 167 ] an airstrike was launched on a boarding school in sudzha , kursk oblast, killing four people according to ukrainian authorities. [ 168 ] over 100 russian civilians were "evacuated" by ukraine to sumy oblast , making it the largest movement of civilians into ukraine since the start of the incursion . [ 169 ] ukrainian drone attacks killed two persons in belgorod oblast , including one in the village of malinovka , according to governor vyacheslav gladkov . [ 170 ] sergey yefremov , the deputy governor of primorsky krai and commander of the "tigr" battalion of the 155th guards naval infantry brigade , was killed in kursk oblast. [ 171 ] [ 172 ] russian air defence claimed to have downed 70 drones over volgograd, rostov and astrakhan oblasts , targeting oil facilities in these regions. an oil refinery in volgograd was set on fire. in astrakhan, governor igor babushkin confirmed that a "fire broke out" while ukraine said it had targeted a gas processing plant there. no casualties were reported. [ 173 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have inflicted significant losses during a strike by the ukrainian air force on a russian command post near novoivanovka, kursk oblast . [ 174 ] armen sargsyan , founder of the arbat battalion [ ru ] that had fought in ukraine, was killed along with a bodyguard by a bomb left in the lobby of the aliye parusa residential complex in moscow. [ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] the sbu arrested a man in sarny , rivne oblast on suspicion of plotting to blow up a railway line on behalf of russia. [ 178 ] russian milbloggers claimed that russian forces had taken the villages of zelene pole [ uk ] and tarasivka near pokrovsk. [ 177 ] prominent russian soldier and veteran of the russo-georgian war , tasbolat ibrashev was killed fighting in vovchansk , kharkiv oblast. ibrashev was famous in the russian army for single-handedly stopping a georgian military column in 2008. [ 179 ] a russian missile attack on izium killed at least five people and injured at least 55 others. [ 180 ] brigadier general hennadii shapovalov resigned as commander of the ukrainian operational command south following his appointment as a liaison to the nato military aid coordination center for ukraine based in germany. [ 181 ] russian forces claimed to have taken the village of sribne, donetsk oblast [ uk ] , south of pokrovsk. [ 182 ] zelenskyy said that 45,100 ukrainian soldiers had been killed since the full-scale invasion by russia, while 390,000 soldiers had been wounded. he also claimed that 300,000 to 350,000 russian soldiers had been killed, 600,000 to 700,000 wounded and 50,000 to 70,000 missing in the war so far. [ 183 ] [ 184 ] the russian governor of krasnodar krai claimed ukrainian drones set fire to an oil storage tank at an oil depot, adding that the fire was quickly extinguished and no injuries reported. russia claimed to have downed four drones overnight. [ 185 ] ukrainian drones struck a "mini-refinery" in the village of novominskaya . a buk-m3 was also reported damaged by ukrainian drones in zaporizhzhia oblast. [ 186 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces had taken the village of novomlynsk [ uk ] in northeastern kharkiv oblast and baranivka , north of ocheretyne . [ 187 ] a ukrainian military observer reported that russian forces had taken the village of zapadne in kharkiv oblast while a russian source claimed that russian forces had crossed the oskil river near the village of topoli . [ 184 ] russia and ukraine conducted a prisoner exchange mediated by the uae that saw the release of 150 pows held by each side. [ 188 ] ukraine imposed sanctions on 57 ship captains involved in the illegal export of russian oil to bypass price caps. it also imposed sanctions on 55 russian officials and figures involved in illegal excavations and removal of artifacts from occupied areas of ukraine, including officials of the hermitage and pushkin museums . [ 189 ] the governor of belgorod oblast claimed that three people were killed in a ukrainian drone strike near the village of logachevka . [ 190 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have struck the primorsko-akhtarsk air base in krasnodar krai, causing a fire. [ 191 ] russian forces captured the village of dachne , west of kurakhove, and fyholivka , west of the oskil river. [ 192 ] ukrainian forces launched a new offensive in kursk oblast, capturing the settlements of kolmakov and fanaseyevka . [ 192 ] russia claimed to have repulsed the offensive southeast of sudzha , in the villages of ulanok and cherkasskaya konopelka . russia claimed ukrainian forces deployed "two mechanized battalions, tanks, and armored vehicles" in the attack. [ 193 ] the first mirage 2000-5s fighter jets sent by france arrived in ukraine, [ 194 ] as well as another round of f-16s from the netherlands. [ 195 ] vadym sukharevsky , commander of the ukrainian unmanned systems forces , said that the ukrainian laser tryzub (trident) was being used operationally and "already striking certain targets at certain altitudes." [ 196 ] the ukrainian air force confirmed a russian kab bomb was shot down over zaporizhzhia oblast, possibly with "experimental weapons". [ 197 ] three people were killed in a russian airstrike on myropillia, sumy oblast . [ 198 ] russian forces claimed to have taken toretsk, which the ukrainian military denied. [ 199 ] [ 200 ] president zelenskyy said that north korean troops had been redeployed to kursk oblast. approximately 60,000 soldiers have currently been deployed against ukrainian units in kursk. [ 201 ] two russian valdai radars used to intercept drones headed to moscow were destroyed by the hur using explosives near dolgoprudny , moscow oblast . [ 202 ] russian forces claimed to have intercepted a ukrainian drone over an oil refinery in kumylzhensky district , volgograd oblast, and shot down a total of 36 drones over krasnodar krai and rostov, volgograd, and belgorod oblasts. [ 203 ] ukrainian officials said that drones were used to attack two military airfields, the russian southern military district headquarters and s-400 missiles located in rostov-on-don . [ 204 ] russian authorities were reported to have discovered a plot in which a shipment of fpv drone headsets loaded with explosives were sent to russian soldiers. each headset had 10-15 grams of explosives and were programmed to detonate on activation. officials compared it to the 2024 lebanon electronic device attacks by israel. [ 205 ] subsequent reports claimed eight russian fpv pilots lost their eyesight due to explosions between 4 and 7 february. the first explosion was reported on 4 february in belgorod oblast, subsequent explosions occurred in kursk, luhansk and donetsk oblasts. [ 206 ] ukrainian forces claimed to have shot down a russian su-25 fighter jet using an igla missile and damaged an mi-8 helicopter sent to rescue the pilot in a drone strike, forcing it to retreat near toretsk. [ 207 ] russian forces claimed to have taken the village of orikhovo-vasylivka , ten kilometers north of chasiv yar. [ 208 ] russian forces claimed that 14 buildings were damaged in a drone attack on rostov-on-don. [ 209 ] russian forces claimed to have recaptured the settlement of fanaseyevka in kursk oblast. [ 210 ] the afipsky oil refinery in krasnodar krai was attacked by ukrainian drones. a high-rise building in krasnodar city was also damaged. [ 211 ] an f-16am was spotted flying low over ukraine. the f-16 was not equipped with air to air missiles but with a "full loadout" of small diameter bombs . this is the first footage of a ukrainian f-16 being used on a strike mission, instead of for air defence. [ 212 ] russian forces set up netting over the road between bakhmut and chasiv yar, installing a two-kilometer tunnel made up of poles with mesh netting being placed over the most vulnerable section of road to protect against drones. [ 213 ] ukrainian drones struck saratov oblast setting fire to the saratov oil refinery , according to locals. explosions were also reported around the perimeter of engels-2 air base . [ 214 ] the deputy head of the presidential office of ukraine pavlo palisa said that the armed forces of ukraine would no longer create new brigades. [ 215 ] one person was killed in a russian missile attack on kyiv. other strikes damaged infrastructure in the holosiivskyi , podilskyi , sviatoshynskyi and obolonskyi districts. [ 216 ] five people were injured by russian shelling on 13 villages in sumy oblast. [ 217 ] a russian attack drone was intercepted by an apkws -fired vampire missile over ukrainian airspace. [ 218 ] the ukrainian 63rd separate mechanized brigade claimed to have destroyed a russian smerch-2 anti-submarine rocket launcher in the lyman sector of the donetsk front. [ 219 ] sbu head vasyl malyuk announced that the chief of its counter-terrorism department, col. dmytro kozyura had been arrested on suspicion of working for russia since 2018. [ 220 ] us president donald trump said negotiations to end the ukraine war will start immediately after holding a telephone call with russian president vladimir putin . [ 221 ] geo-located footage showed that russian forces had taken the village of makiivka in luhansk oblast . [ 222 ] the novolipetsk steel mill in lipetsk was targeted by ukrainian drones in a "massive raid", according to the local governor igor artamonov . drone debris damaged a power station injuring an employee and cutting power to several districts of lipetsk city. [ 223 ] two russian drones believed to have been deployed in an attack on reni crashed over the border in moldova. [ 224 ] zelenskyy imposed sanctions on multiple oligarchs and individuals including former president petro poroshenko , viktor medvedchuk , kostyantyn zhevago , ihor kolomoyskyi and gennadiy bogolyubov on suspicion of "high treason" and "assisting a terrorist organization", particularly their role in compromising national security through unfavorable business agreements with russia. [ 225 ] russian forces claimed to have taken the village of berezivka , near pokrovsk. [ 226 ] zelenskyy said that a russian drone attack significantly damaged the chernobyl new safe confinement covering reactor no. 4 of chernobyl nuclear power plant , which was installed following the 1986 disaster . [ 227 ] russia denied responsibility, [ 228 ] while the international atomic energy agency said that radiation levels at the site remained normal. [ 229 ] the governor of belgorod oblast claimed that one person was killed in a ukrainian drone attack in kukuyevka . [ 230 ] the remains of 757 ukrainian soldiers killed in action were repatriated in an exchange which also saw the repatriation of the remains of 45 russian soldiers. [ 231 ] the organisation for the prohibition of chemical weapons said that the prohibited cs gas was found in samples supplied to it by ukraine from frontline areas. [ 232 ] the ukrainian air force bombed a russian drone base in the border village of elizavetovka , kursk oblast. [ 233 ] the first russian tos-2 mlrs was destroyed by artillery fire in the “pokrovsk region”. [ 234 ] russian officials claimed that a drone strike in kaluga oblast caused a fire at an industrial facility in dzerzhinsky district , [ 235 ] while another series of drone strikes hit an oil refinery and an apartment building in volgograd . [ 236 ] ukrainian forces claimed to have retaken the village of pishchane near pokrovsk. [ 237 ] zelenskyy said that more than 46,000 ukrainian soldiers had been killed and that nearly 380,000 others had been injured since the start of the russian invasion in 2022. [ 238 ] the czech-led artillery initiative delivered 1.6 million rounds of "large-caliber ammunition". czech president petr pavel said ukraine has “sufficient resources to cover ukraine's need" until april 2025. [ 239 ] the ukrainian 65th mechanized brigade claimed to have destroyed a tor missile system and two buk missile systems using drones during fighting in zaporizhzhia oblast over the course of one day. [ 240 ] trump said he would allow european countries to buy us weapons on behalf of, or transfer them to, ukraine. [ 241 ] the governor of krasnodar krai claimed that one person was injured while 12 homes were damaged following a wave of ukrainian drone attacks on the region. [ 242 ] russian forces claimed to have "neutralized" a neptune-md over the sea of azov and 90 drones across the black sea, crimea, krasnodar krai and in bryansk, belgorod, krasnodar, rostov and kursk oblasts. the ilya oil refinery was reported to be on fire after locals reported hearing explosions. [ 243 ] [ 244 ] a drone also hit the kropotkinskaya pumping station in krasnodar krai, part of the caspian pipeline consortium running from kazakhstan to novorossiysk . [ 245 ] according to an official the attack had reduced the flow through the pipeline which will affect chevron and exxon . the operator stopped the pipeline while damage was investigated. they claimed seven drones were involved but an unclear number struck the pipeline. [ 246 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces retook the village of sverdlikovo [ ru ] in kursk oblast. [ 247 ] russian sources claimed that russian forces captured the village of novosilka in southern donetsk oblast. [ 247 ] over 10,000 ukrainians, aged 18 to 24, have applied to join the ukrainian military according to a spokesperson for the ukrainian mod. the “special contracts” contain free higher education, interest free mortgages and an annual salary of hr 1 million ($24,000). [ 248 ] the ukrainian 156th mechanized brigade received some 100 btr-60s from bulgaria which had been overhauled and modernised with new engines, radios, optics and anti-drone netting. [ 249 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces had retaken the village of yampolivka [ uk ] , near terny . [ 250 ] in donetsk, ukrainian drones destroyed a s-350 missile system , believed to be the third of the war so far destroyed. only six are known to be in service. [ 251 ] russia and the united states began official discussions in saudi arabia on ending the war in ukraine. [ 252 ] the hur said a new turbofan jet-powered shahed-238, called geran-3 by the russians and with a range of over 2,500 kilometers and a maximum speed of 600 km/h is in production. [ 253 ] drones struck the syzran oil refinery in samara oblast. locals reported three explosions and the governor, vyacheslav fedorishchev , confirmed a fire broke out at the refinery without casualties. [ 254 ] the ukrainian military said that it had destroyed a north korean-built m-1978 koksan artillery system for the first time. [ 255 ] the romanian parliament passed a bill allowing its military to shoot down russian drones entering romanian airspace from ukraine after romanian military units were unable to do so due to romania and russia not being at war. [ 256 ] putin said that russian forces had crossed the international border into ukraine's sumy oblast , which was denied by ukraine. [ 257 ] zelenskyy said that ukraine was “running dangerously low” of patriot missiles. citing a call with a “field commander”, zelenskyy is seeking a licence to build patriot missiles in ukraine and an additional 20 patriot systems. [ 258 ] the fsb claimed to have killed an alleged ukrainian operative accused of plotting to assassinate an unidentified official in saratov oblast. [ 259 ] the hur claimed that an explosion in russian-occupied berdiansk killed the deputy head of the city administration, yevgeny bogdanov . [ 260 ] russian forces captured the village of novoocheretuvate , northwest of velyka novosilka. [ 261 ] russian sources claimed that the village of basivka in sumy oblast had been captured. [ 262 ] an electrical substation that powered the novovelichkovskaya oil pumping station in krasnodar krai was attacked by sbu drones, causing a fire and a shutdown of the refinery. [ 263 ] two people were killed in a russian bombing of kherson. [ 264 ] russia claimed to have taken the village of nadiivka in donetsk oblast, located ten kilometers from the border with dnipropetrovsk oblast . [ 265 ] russian forces seized the village of ulakly following the closure of the pocket west of kurakhove. [ 261 ] geolocated footage confirmed the russian recapture of fanaseyevka in kursk oblast. russian milbloggers claimed that cherkasskaya konopelka had been recaptured. [ 266 ] one person was killed in a russian drone strike in kyiv oblast. [ 267 ] two others were killed in russian airstrikes in kostiantynivka. [ 268 ] russian sources claimed that topoli in kharkiv oblast had been recaptured. russia claimed to have recaptured the village of novoliubivka near the zherebets river in luhansk oblast. [ 266 ] russia launched its largest single drone attack on ukraine for the war, with ukrainian air force command spokesman yurii ihnat counting 267 drones and claiming that 138 of them had been intercepted. two people were killed in kherson, while a third person died in a missile attack in kryvyi rih. [ 269 ] russian forces recaptured the settlement of bilohorivka in luhansk oblast. [ 270 ] two people were killed in russian airstrikes in sumy oblast. [ 271 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have set fire on the ryazan oil refinery following a drone strike. [ 272 ] the local governor pavel malkov confirmed falling debris set fire to an "industrial facility in the region". [ 273 ] an italian defence analyst identified italian-made b1 centauro tank destroyers headed to ukraine in a convoy, however the italian government is yet to confirm their delivery. [ 274 ] one person was killed in a russian attack on kramatorsk . [ 275 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have repelled a russian attack near the village of novenke in sumy oblast. [ 276 ] ukrainian forces destroyed a s-300vm missile system in zaporizhzhia oblast using a bomber drone. [ 277 ] ireland donated four giraffe mk ivs in its first delivery of military equipment to ukraine . [ 278 ] geolocated footage confirmed that russian forces had captured andriivka in donetsk oblast. [ 279 ] ukrinform journalist tetiana kulyk was killed along with her husband in a russian drone strike on their residence in kriukivshchyna , kyiv oblast. [ 280 ] five others were killed and 11 people were injured in separate attacks in kostiantynivka. [ 281 ] [ 282 ] ukrainian forces claimed to have retaken kotlyne , near pokrovsk. [ 283 ] russian officials claimed that 128 drones were shot down over crimea, the sea of azov , the black sea , krasnodar krai and in bryansk and kursk oblasts. [ 284 ] sochi airport suspended flights, explosions were reported in anapa and the governor of krasnodar krai, veniamin kondratyev , reported three private homes were damaged across the area. [ 285 ] in crimea explosions were reported in kerch , where the crimean bridge was temporarily closed to traffic. local partisans reported russian military personnel were trying to avoid reporting for duty due to ongoing drone attacks. [ 286 ] the ukrainian military claimed that it had targeted saky and kacha air bases in crimea as well as the port of tuapse in krasnodar krai. [ 287 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces had retaken the settlements of pogrebki and orlovla in kursk oblast. [ 279 ] the ukrainian air force struck a russian drone command post attached to the 19th motor rifle division in zaporizhzhia oblast. [ 288 ] a russian command post attached to the 14th army corps in ivanivka, kherson oblast , was struck by an hur bomber drone. [ 289 ] russian officials claimed that one person was killed in a drone strike in belgorod oblast. [ 290 ] south korean intelligence claimed that north korea is sending an unspecified number of additional soldiers to fight in kursk oblast, alongside russian forces. [ 291 ] syrskyi visited novopavlivka , in donetsk oblast. he claimed the russian advance had been slowed and ukrainian forces had "regrouped". [ 292 ] russian forces are in places 4.5 km (2.8 miles) from dnipropetrovsk oblast. [ 293 ] russian forces claimed to have retaken the settlements of nikolskiy [ ru ] [ 294 ] and novaya sorochina north and northwest of sudzha. [ 295 ] geolocated footage confirmed that russian forces had captured the village of skudne , north of velyka novosilka [ 295 ] and the village of zaporizhzhia , southwest of pokrovsk. [ 296 ] dozens of ukrainian drones struck a russian ammunition dump in kurchatov , kursk oblast according to unofficial sources. a fire and secondary detonations were reported. the russian defense ministry said that 22 drones were shot down over krasnodar krai and oryol, kursk, bryansk, and smolensk oblasts. [ 297 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have destroyed a russian thermobaric munitions depot near selydove , donetsk oblast. [ 298 ] the fsb arrested two church officials on suspicion of trying to kill a russian orthodox bishop, tikhon shevkunov , who is close to putin. the hur denied the accusations saying they were "absurd" and "lies". [ 299 ] russian forces launched nine drone strikes in the kyivskyi , shevchenkivskyi and kholodnohirskyi districts of kharkiv, damaging a medical facility and civilian infrastructure and injuring seven people. [ 300 ] a car bomb seriously wounded a russian fsb officer in mariupol . [ 301 ] kongsberg announced that it was working on integrating ukrainian missiles into a nasams launcher. a joint venture involving the production of ukrainian missiles is also being discussed. [ 302 ] russian forces captured the village of burlatske , near velyka novosilka. [ 303 ] [ 304 ] one person was killed in a russian drone strike in odesa oblast . [ 303 ] in the evening, a ballistic missile attack was made on the port of odesa , injuring two port employees and damaging the swiss-owned and panamanian -flagged cargo vessel msc levante f . [ 305 ] ukrainian forces were attacked with a russian iskander-m ballistic missile at a training ground in cherkaske, dnipropetrovsk oblast , resulting in an unspecified number of casualties. [ 306 ] one person was killed in a russian drone strike in kherson. [ 307 ] russian forces claimed to have taken the town of zhuravka after crossing into sumy oblast. [ 304 ] russian forces also claimed to have taken the town of pryvline , northwest of velyka novosilka. [ 304 ] british prime minister keir starmer announced a £1.6 billion agreement allowing ukraine to purchase over 5,000 lightweight multirole missiles . [ 308 ] czech citizens raised 70 million koruna ($3 million) to purchase an uh-60 blackhawk helicopter for ukraine. [ 309 ] the ufimsky refinery plant in ufa was set on fire by ukrainian drones. [ 310 ] kongsberg gruppen announced a plan to build hundreds of nasams missiles in ukraine. [ 311 ] the us government suspended all military aid to ukraine, including what was approved under president biden. [ 312 ] drones struck an oil refinery in syzran , samara oblast. locals reported explosions and a fire. [ 313 ] further attacks were reported in rostov oblast with an "industrial complex" and oil pipeline in the village of sokhranovka being set on fire by drones, according to the regional governor yury slyusar . [ 314 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have killed 30 russian soldiers in an airstrike on a military facility near troitskoye , kursk oblast. [ 315 ] russian forces claimed to have captured the town of kurilovka , southwest of sudzha. [ 316 ] a s-400 missile system in crimea caught fire in unknown circumstances, engulfing its antenna. [ 317 ] five people were killed in a russian missile attack on kryvyi rih. [ 318 ] [ 319 ] the ukrainian military said it carried out an airstrike on the command post of the 17th tank regiment of the russian 70th motorized rifle division in oleshky , kherson oblast. [ 320 ] cia director john ratcliffe confirmed that the us paused intelligence sharing with ukraine. [ 321 ] russian forces claimed to have crossed the international border into kharkiv oblast and captured the nekhoteyevka international border crossing checkpoint east of kozacha lopan . [ 316 ] norway announced that it would increase its military aid to ukraine from $3.2 billion in 2024 to $7.7 billion for 2025. [ 322 ] maxar technologies stopped supplying the ukrainian government with satellite images after a request from the us executive office . [ 323 ] mirage 2000 fighter jets sent by france to ukraine were used in combat against russian air attacks for the first time. [ 324 ] russian forces made a breakthrough south of sudzha threatening to encircle ukrainian units in the area and were also advancing in the villages of zhuravka and novenke . [ 325 ] [ 326 ] [ 327 ] russian forces also recaptured the town of staraya sorochina . [ 328 ] ukraine received $1 billion from the british government, the first payment of money to ukraine secured from the profits from seized russian assets. [ 329 ] russian forces carried out a missile and drone attack on ukrainian energy infrastructure. [ 330 ] major general and commander of ukraine's operational command north , dmytro krasylnykov told ukrainian media outlet suspilne that he was dismissed from his post for "unclear reasons". [ 331 ] eleven people were killed in a russian attack on dobropillia , donetsk oblast, while three others were killed in a drone attack in bohodukhiv , kharkiv oblast. [ 332 ] [ 333 ] the kirishi oil refinery in leningrad oblast was struck by falling drone debris, damaging a storage tank according to governor aleksandr drozdenko . [ 332 ] in kursk oblast, geolocated footage showed that russian forces had recaptured the settlements of cherkasskoye porechnoye [ ru ] [ 334 ] and lebedevka [ ru ] , [ 335 ] while russian forces further claimed to have retaken the settlements of kubatkin , viktorovka , martynovka and nikolayevka . [ 334 ] geolocated footage also confirmed russian control over novenke in sumy oblast. [ 335 ] russian forces claimed to have taken the town of kostyantynopil in donetsk oblast. [ 334 ] atesh said it burned down a relay cabinet near stolbove , crimea, that services a railway connecting crimea and zaporizhzhia oblast. [ 336 ] ukrainian drones hit an oil refinery in chuvashia in the first such attack in the russian autonomous republic. [ 337 ] geolocated footage showed that russian forces had captured the settlements of malaya loknya and novaya sorochina in kursk oblast, as well as kostyantynopil in donetsk oblast. [ 335 ] ukrainian drones struck the novokuybyshevsk oil refinery in samara oblast. locals reported several explosions in the city. [ 338 ] the sbu arrested a resident of kharkiv on suspicion of plotting attacks on soldiers on behalf of russia. [ 339 ] russian forces claimed to have taken the towns of bogdanovka , mirny and kolmakov in kursk oblast. [ 340 ] moscow mayor sergey sobyanin claimed russian air defences shot down 69 drones over moscow. flights from domodedovo and zhukovsky airports were restricted. [ 341 ] [ 342 ] three people were killed and 20 were injured. sobyanin said it was the "most massive" attack on moscow. several high rise buildings were damaged by falling debris and over 20 cars were destroyed by a fire in a parking lot. the ukrainian general staff claimed to have targeted various oil refinery and pipelines in moscow and oryol. [ 343 ] [ 344 ] russian air defense further reported to have shot down 337 drones in other regions, including 91 over moscow oblast, 126 over kursk oblast, and 38 over bryansk oblast. [ 342 ] russian forces recaptured the towns of bondarevka , zamostye , makhnovka , kazachya loknya , knyazhiy 2 and knyazhiy 1 in kursk oblast. russian millbloggers further claimed that russian forces took the towns of kolmakov and dmitryukov . [ 345 ] russian forces captured a fully intact ukrainian m1a1 abrams tank in kursk oblast. [ 346 ] the sbu accused russian intelligence of recruiting two teenagers to carry out bomb attacks in ivano-frankivsk that killed one of the teenagers and injured the other along with two bystanders. [ 347 ] four syrian nationals were killed in a russian missile attack on the port of odesa which damaged the barbados-flagged bulk carrier mj pinar , which was loading wheat bound for algeria . [ 348 ] the governor of kursk oblast claimed that four people were killed in a ukrainian attack on a feed mill in kozyrevka . [ 349 ] the governors of rostov and voronezh oblast claimed that infrastructure facilities were set on fire by drone attacks. [ 350 ] after talks between us and ukrainian officials in jeddah , saudi arabia, the us restarted military aid to ukraine as well as intelligence support. [ 351 ] maxar also confirmed that it had restored ukrainian access to its satellite images. [ 352 ] according to deepstate 's map, ukrainian forces lost control of sudzha in kursk oblast. [ 353 ] russian forces also captured dniproenerhiia in donetsk oblast. [ 354 ] the ukrainian 43rd separate artillery brigade claimed to have destroyed a russian s-400 battery in an undisclosed location. [ 355 ] the ukrainian air force stated that the samp/t downed a russian sukhoi military aircraft without providing further details. [ 356 ] russia claimed that its air defences shot down 77 drones, while its operation to retake kursk oblast entered its last phase. [ 357 ] russian forces claimed to have captured and cleared the towns of sudzha , podol , goncharovka , zaoleshenka , rubanshchina and molovoi in kursk oblast. [ 358 ] hur drones struck a russian drone factory in obukhovo , kaluga oblast. explosions and a fire were reported at an industrial site. [ 359 ] the defence council of sumy oblast announced a mandatory evacuation from eight settlements in yunakivka and myropillia hromadas of sumy raion . [ 360 ] the former leader of the right sector 's odesa branch, demyan hanul , was assassinated in odesa. [ 361 ] the us started resupplying ukraine with glsdbs due to a shortage of atacms missiles. [ 362 ] it was reported that a captured crimean tatar , who fought in the ukrainian army, died in a russian penal colony in dimitrovgrad, russia . [ 363 ] the governor of krasnodar krai stated that the tuapse refinery was struck by ukrainian drones, causing a 1,000 square meter fire [ 364 ] that took until 17 march to extinguish. [ 365 ] the mayor of moscow claimed that four drones were shot down in a separate attack near the capital. [ 366 ] the attack was believed to have been conducted by a r-360 neptune missile. [ 367 ] yan petrovsky , and former commander of the russian paramilitary rusich group who was arrested in finland in 2023, was sentenced by a court in helsinki to life imprisonment for war crimes committed in ukraine. [ 368 ] russian forces likely captured the town of goncharovka in kursk oblast. [ 369 ] ukraine said that it downed 130 drones launched by russia in overnight strikes, while russia claimed that it intercepted 126 drones fired by ukraine. [ 370 ] one person was killed in a russian attack on nikopol . [ 371 ] russian forces claimed to have taken the town of stepove in zaporizhzhia oblast. [ 372 ] the russian mod claimed to have shot down an ukrainian mig-29. [ 373 ] ukraine claimed that aster-30 missiles for samp/t are at a "critical low" and the two batteries they operate will soon become "inoperable". [ 374 ] andriy hnatov was appointed as chief of general staff of the ukrainian armed forces , replacing anatoliy barhylevych . [ 375 ] russian forces claimed to have taken the towns of mali shcherbaky and shcherbaky in zaporizhzhia oblast. [ 376 ] the governor of astrakhan oblast claimed that an oil refinery was set on fire by drones. [ 377 ] germany announced an aid package to ukraine consisting of 10,000 rounds for gepard air defence, 5,000 155 mm rounds, 2,000 122 mm rounds and ammunition for various fighting vehicles supplied by germany, and 24 mraps . [ 378 ] zelenskyy signed a law allowing the ukrainian military to operate overseas in times of martial law. [ 379 ] ukrainian lieutenant general serhii naiev said that ukrainian forces withdrew from an unknown frontline sector in donetsk oblast to preserve its forces and obtain better positions. [ 380 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have destroyed a command post of the russian 20th army 's 3rd motor rifle division near demidovka, belgorod oblast . [ 381 ] putin ordered russian forces to halt attacks targeting ukrainian energy infrastructure for 30 days after his phone call with trump. [ 382 ] russian forces shot down seven russian drones headed for ukrainian energy facilities connected to "ukraine's military-industrial complex" over mykolaiv oblast . six were shot down by a russian pantsir missile system and the last by a russian fighter jet. [ 383 ] russian sources claimed that ukrainian forces attacked from sumy oblast into the villages of demidovka, grafovka , and prilesye in belgorod oblast. russian forces later claimed to have repelled the attack. [ 384 ] russian authorities reported that ukrainian drones struck and damaged an oil pumping station in krasnodar krai, while russia launched 145 drones and six missiles into ukraine. [ 385 ] a number of hospitals in sumy oblast were attacked by russian drones, [ 386 ] while one person was killed in a separate attack on a residential building. [ 387 ] russia and ukraine conducted a prisoner exchange that saw the release of 175 pows from their respective sides. [ 388 ] zelenskyy announced that additional f-16s had arrived in ukraine from an undisclosed country. [ 389 ] russia claimed that it downed 132 drones launched by ukraine. [ 390 ] explosions were reported near the engels-2 air base . [ 391 ] ukrainian intelligence stated that a warehouse with guided bombs and missiles was destroyed. the governor of saratov oblast, roman busargin , confirmed that the attack "left an airfield on fire" and nearby residents had to be evacuated. [ 392 ] fifty drones were reportedly used, targeting ammunition storage at the air base. satellite images showed several large craters. reports stated that three service personnel were wounded, while two were killed. some 120 civilians were evacuated and some 180 private homes were damaged due to the shockwave from the explosion. clinical hospital no. 1 in engels was damaged by falling debris. five civilians were reported injured. [ 393 ] ukrainian intelligence claimed that the attack on engels-2 destroyed some 96 cruise missiles. [ 394 ] russian forces launched over 20 drones overnight and attacked kropyvnytskyi , injuring 10 people including four children. [ 395 ] the hur claimed that two russian officers were killed in a car bombing in skadovsk , kherson oblast. [ 396 ] two people were injured in a car bombing in rivne . [ 397 ] three people were killed in a russian drone strike on zaporizhzhia. [ 398 ] the sudzha gas pumping and metering station in kursk oblast was shelled, with russia and ukraine trading responsibility over the attack. [ 399 ] dtek reported that russian drone strikes caused power outages in at least three districts in odesa . [ 400 ] the governor of belgorod oblast claimed that one person was killed in a ukrainian drone strike in dobrino . [ 401 ] the uk government and the irish subsidiary of the french company thales signed a contract to manufacture 5,000 nlaws for the ukrainian army. [ 402 ] ukrainian drones struck the russian promsintez explosives factory in chapayevsk , samara oblast. the local governor, vyacheslav fedorishev, said that the attack resulted in "no damage or casualties", while one drone was shot down. however, footage on telegram showed explosions in the area of the factory. [ 403 ] three people were killed in a russian drone strike on kyiv, while three others were killed in a separate attack in dobropillia. [ 404 ] ukrainian drones attacked an oil refinery in volgograd. according to russian sources the drones were shot down as they approached the facility. [ 405 ] the governor of rostov oblast claimed that one person was killed in a drone attack on a car. [ 404 ] ukraine said it had retaken the settlement of nadiia in luhansk oblast following a 30-hour operation. [ 406 ] atesh claimed to have destroyed a transformer cabinet on a railway line in smolensk oblast to disrupt the transport of military cargo toward bryansk and kursk oblasts. [ 407 ] the website of ukrainian railways was hit by a massive cyberattack. [ 408 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have launched missile strikes that destroyed two russian ka-52 and two mi-8 helicopters at a landing site in belgorod oblast. the landing site was struck by "missile strikes", including rockets fired from himars. [ 409 ] three russian journalists working for izvestia and zvezda were killed in a strike on their car in the kupiansk sector, according to izvestia . the head of the luhansk people's republic , leonid pasechnik , and the investigative committee of russia said that they were killed along with three civilians in kreminna . [ 410 ] the ukrainian air force claimed to have killed 30 russian soldiers during a "precise strike" in kondratovka in kursk oblast. [ 411 ] the united states said it had brokered an agreement for russia and ukraine to stop military action in the black sea and ensure safe navigation of shipping following negotiations in saudi arabia. [ 412 ] russian millbloggers claimed that russian forces cleared the villages of demidovka and popovka in belgorod oblast. the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces took the town of myrne , northeast of lyman in donetsk oblast. [ 413 ] the sbu arrested a ukrainian soldier on suspicion of providing coordinates of ukrainian positions in kursk oblast for russian intelligence. [ 414 ] russia's channel one said that one of its film crew hit a landmine in belgorod oblast near the ukrainian border, killing journalist anna prokofieva and injuring a cameraman. [ 415 ] a court in rostov-on-don convicted 23 members of the azov brigade , including 11 in absentia, of terrorism charges related to the war in ukraine, and sentenced them to up to 23 years' imprisonment. [ 416 ] the french government announced a 2 billion euros ($2.1 billion) military aid package for ukraine. including missiles for mirage-2000 fighters, milan anti-tank missiles, amx-10 rc light tanks, vab troop carriers and mistral missiles. [ 417 ] the ukrainian air force said that russia fired 86 drones and an iskander-m ballistic missile in overnight attacks. [ 418 ] ukrainian commander oleksandr syrskyi said that russia had lost more than 55,000 soldiers during the fighting in kursk, with 970 soldiers surrendering to ukrainian forces, 22,200 killed and 31,800 as "sanitary casualties". [ 419 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have killed the commander of the 1st battalion of the russian 9th motor rifle regiment in an attack on a command and observation post somewhere between viktorovka and uspenovka in kursk oblast. [ 420 ] it also claimed to have killed between 15 to 40 russian soldiers in an airstrike on the pogar border checkpoint in bryansk oblast. [ 421 ] four people were killed in a russian drone attack on dnipro. [ 422 ] soldiers from the ukrainian 101st territorial defense brigade planted and detonated anti-tank mines beneath a high rise building in toretsk containing russian soldiers from an "assault group". [ 423 ] russia and ukraine traded blame for another attack on the sudzha gas metering station in kursk oblast. [ 424 ] [ 425 ] the remains of 909 ukrainian soldiers killed in action were repatriated from russia in exchange for those of 43 russian personnel. [ 426 ] russian forces claimed to have taken the town of krasne pershe , northeast of kupiansk. [ 427 ] two people were killed in a russian drone strike on kharkiv. [ 428 ] ukraine also accused russia of inflicting casualties on patients being treated at a military hospital during the attack. [ 429 ] russia claimed to have taken the villages of shchebraki in zaporizhzhia oblast, panteleimonivka in donetsk oblast, and veselivka in sumy oblast. [ 430 ] [ 431 ] geo-located footage showed that russian forces took the town of preobrazhenka in donetsk oblast. [ 432 ] geo-located footage confirms russian control of veselivka in sumy oblast. [ 433 ] the sbu arrested three people, including a russian national, on suspicion of facilitating russian attacks on kyiv. [ 434 ] the moscow metro was targeted by a suspected cyberattack involving its website displaying messages shown during the 23 march cyberattack on ukrainian railways. [ 435 ] geolocated footage provided by the russian defense ministry showed that russian forces took the town of gogolevka in kursk oblast. [ 433 ] geo-located footage showed that russian forces took the town of rozlyv in the kurakhove sector of donetsk oblast. [ 436 ] sweden announced a military aid package to ukraine worth $1.6 billion, its largest aid package since the full scale invasion occurred. [ 437 ] ukrainian drones destroyed kh-22 missiles at shaykovka air base in kaluga oblast according to satellite imagery. [ 438 ] ukrainian military commander oleksandr syrskyi said that a drone destroyed a tu-22m3 after it landed. [ 439 ] russian-installed officials in donetsk oblast claimed that 15 people were injured in a ukrainian drone strike in horlivka . [ 440 ] the sbu announced the arrest in poland and extradition of a person accused of being a pro-russian propagandist linked to a disinformation network operated by oligarch viktor medvedchuk . [ 441 ] four people were killed in a russian missile attack on kryvyi rih. [ 442 ] one person was killed in a drone strike in zaporizhzhia city. [ 443 ] geo-located footage showed that russian forces took the town of oleksandropil in donetsk oblast and lobkove in zaporizhzhia oblast. [ 444 ] four people were killed in a russian drone strike on kharkiv. [ 445 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces took the town of vesele , northwest of velyka novosilka . [ 446 ] major general apti alaudinov confirmed that a commander of a kadyrovite uav unit (callsign "amur") was killed. the hur claimed responsibility for the explosion, which occurred in melitopol and destroyed a tigr armoured car , killing five "kadyrovites" in total. [ 447 ] 19 people were killed in a russian missile attack on kryvyi rih. [ 448 ] a drone attack on the city later that day killed one person. [ 449 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces took the town of uspenivka in the pokrovsk sector of donetsk oblast. [ 450 ] oleksandr syrskyi , commander-in-chief of the ukrainian armed forces, claimed that ukraine is deploying drones that use exceptionally long fibre-optic cables "with a combat range of 20 km". [ 451 ] germany announced it would send 500,000 155 mm artillery shells to ukraine in 2025. at the same time the czech initiative has enough funding to supply ukraine with artillery until september 2025. [ 452 ] ukrainian drones attacked two factories in russia, including the only fibre-optic manufacturing plant in the country, located in mordovia and an explosives manufacturer in samara oblast. [ 453 ] the netherlands announced it would invest €1.1 billion in the ukrainian domestic defence industry. [ 454 ] geo-located footage showed that russian forces retook the town of solone in the pokrovsk sector of donetsk oblast. [ 455 ] one person was killed in a russian missile attack on kyiv. [ 456 ] another person was killed in a drone strike in kherson. [ 457 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces captured the town of basivka in sumy oblast, although the claim was not confirmed by the ukrainian border guard service. [ 458 ] an indian-made electronic component was found inside a geran-2 drone for the first time following the discovery of an aura semiconductor inside its crp antenna . [ 459 ] ukrainian drones destroyed three buk missile launchers in kursk oblast over 12 hours. [ 460 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces took the town of katerynivka , northeast of lyman. [ 461 ] president zelenskyy officially confirmed that the 225th assault regiment was conducting "active operations" in belgorod oblast. [ 462 ] he also announced the capture of two chinese nationals fighting for russia in donetsk oblast. [ 463 ] the russian ministry of defense announced the recapture of guyevo in kursk oblast. [ 464 ] the prosecutor general of ukraine announced the arrest of a man from crimea on suspicion of carrying out assassinations of soldiers and government officials as well as bomb attacks for russian intelligence. [ 465 ] the russian military acknowledged that due to a shortage of explosives russian tanks are now having to use non-explosive reactive armour . [ 466 ] belgium announced it would hand over two f-16s to ukraine this year and another two in 2026. [ 467 ] ukrainian drones struck the orenburg air base for the first time since the full scale invasion. attacks were reported on an air base in mozdok , north ossetia and at engels-2 air base. [ 468 ] [ 469 ] the russian mod said that the attack involved 158 drones across multiple regions. [ 470 ] [ 471 ] russian air defences shot down a russian helicopter during a ukrainian drone attack on moscow. it was believed to have been mistaken for a drone by air defences. [ 472 ] one person was killed in a russian drone strike in zhytomyr oblast , [ 473 ] while another was killed in a missile attack in dnipro. [ 474 ] the commander of the ukrainian unmanned systems forces , colonel vadym sukharevsky , was dismissed. [ 475 ] a russian court sentenced ukrainian citizen vadim chaly to 16 years in prison and fined 500,000 rubles ($5,900) for plotting to send packages rigged with explosives targeting russian military officials. chaly pleaded guilty to the charges. [ 476 ] a ukrainian mig-29 , using two french aasm hammer bombs, destroyed a company command post and a building occupied by a "security unit" in kherson oblast. [ 477 ] german defence minister boris pistorius announced aid that had been delivered or had been promised by the german government, including 30 patriot missiles, four more iris-t systems, 15 leopard 1 tanks, 100,000 rounds of artillery ammunition and 1,100 ground radars. [ 478 ] russian forces broke through the lines in toretsk and advanced to the town of nelipivka . [ 479 ] one person was killed in a russian drone strike in kherson. [ 480 ] a 26-year old ukrainian f-16 pilot, pavlo ivanov, was killed in combat. [ 481 ] [ 482 ] bbc news ukrainian reported that russia had fired three missiles at the f-16, which was probably flying over sumy oblast, including s-400 ground-to-air and r-37 air-to-air missiles. [ 483 ] geo-located footage showed that russian forces took the town of kalynove [ uk ] , west of new york, donetsk oblast . [ 484 ] thirty-five people were killed in a russian missile attack on sumy . [ 485 ] three people were killed in separate attacks in kherson. [ 486 ] the ukrainian unmanned systems forces released the first footage of a laser weapon system, called " tryzub ", in use destroying a fibre-optic fpv drone. [ 487 ] the sbu arrested an instructor at the yavoriv military base in lviv oblast on suspicion of plotting to assassinate base commanders on behalf of russia. [ 488 ] the ukrainian air force bombed a russian drone unit, hidden in a sugar factory, in the village of tyotkino , kursk oblast. [ 489 ] eu foreign policy chief kaja kallas told reporters that the eu "managed to secure two-thirds" of two millions artillery shells pledged for ukraine by the end of 2025. [ 490 ] a ukrainian source claimed that russian forces took the town of valentynivka , southwest of toretsk. [ 491 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have retaken the village of dniproenerhiia in volnovakha raion , donetsk oblast. [ 492 ] ukrainian drones struck a multi-story apartment block in kursk city, killing one person and injuring nine others. the russian mod claimed to have intercepted 109 drones over kursk oblast. [ 493 ] the ukrainian military claimed to have carried out a strike at the base in kursk oblast of the russian 448th missile brigade accused of carrying out the 2025 sumy airstrike , resulting in an explosion at an ammunition depot. [ 494 ] a mobilised russian soldier, roman ivanishin, was convicted and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment by a court-martial in sakhalin oblast for "desertion and attempted voluntary surrender" after being captured by ukrainian forces in 2023 in donetsk oblast and released in a prisoner exchange in 2024, in what is the first known conviction in russia for voluntarily surrender in the full-scale invasion. [ 495 ] three people were killed in a russian drone strike on dnipro. [ 496 ] one person was killed in a russian attack on kherson. [ 497 ] a drone strike was carried out on military infrastructure in shuya, ivanovo oblast , linked to the russian 112th missile brigade, which was accused of carrying out the 2025 sumy airstrike . [ 498 ] [ 499 ] russia claimed that its air defenses shot down seven ukrainian drones over ivanovo oblast that morning. [ 500 ] the sbu said it arrested nine members of a russian intelligence network, including five minors, who were plotting bomb attacks in central and eastern ukraine. [ 501 ] the fsb said it arrested a resident of luhansk oblast on suspicion of plotting to assassinate a member of the people's council [ ru ] of the luhansk people's republic on behalf of ukraine. [ 502 ] a russian-installed court in donetsk sentenced three members of the azov battalion to 24 years' imprisonment for war crimes during the siege of mariupol . [ 503 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that its forces took control of the town of kalynove [ uk ] , located west of new york, donetsk oblast. [ 504 ] [ 505 ] russian forces recaptured the st. nicholas monastery west of guyevo in kursk oblast. [ 506 ] two people were killed by russian shelling in nikopol. [ 507 ] ukrainian drones struck shuya, ivanovo oblast for a second consecutive time, causing a fire. [ 508 ] ukrainian forces claimed to have recaptured 16 square kilometers of donetsk oblast [ 509 ] and repelled a major assault on five villages in zaporizhzhia oblast. [ 510 ] the german government announced a new aid package that included three 155 mm spgh zuzana howitzers, 27,000 155 mm shells, 1,000 122 mm shells, 1,000 iris-t missiles, 917 matador rockets and other weapons. [ 511 ] the us and ukraine signed a "memorandum of intent" to move forward with a deal allowing us access to ukraine’s “natural resources and critical minerals”. [ 512 ] one person was killed in a russian missile attack on kharkiv. another was killed in a drone strike in sumy. [ 513 ] the bodies of 909 ukrainian soldiers killed in action were repatriated from russia in exchange for those of 41 russian soldiers killed in action. [ 514 ] president zelenskyy, citing the sbu and the hur, claimed that china is supplying russia with weapons, “including gunpowder and artillery ammunition”. [ 515 ] russia and ukraine conducted a prisoner exchange that saw both sides releasing 246 pows each. [ 516 ] some 100 russian soldiers broke down a fence and escaped a military camp in krasnodar after being detained for attempted desertion. [ 517 ] russian forces claimed to have pushed ukrainian forces out of oleshnya in kursk oblast up to the international border. [ 518 ] the russian defense ministry claimed that russian forces took the town of novomykhailivka in the lyman sector of donetsk oblast before the start of the easter ceasefire. [ 519 ] ukraine launched a missile attack on a russian drone launch site in kursk oblast near tyotkino, killing up to 20 drone operators. [ 520 ] putin declared a unilateral ceasefire that would last until 00:00 moscow time on 21 april. despite this, ukraine said attacks by russia continued. [ 521 ] a court in russia's sverdlovsk oblast sentenced a resident of lesnoy for treason over his donating the equivalent of $25 to the ukrainian military in 2022. [ 522 ] the sbu arrested two people in chernihiv and khmelnytskyi oblasts on suspicion of spying for russia, [ 523 ] as well as five others for disseminating russian propaganda and justifying war crimes. [ 524 ] ukrainian drones destroyed a russian buk-m2 . [ 525 ] one person was killed in a russian airstrike on zaporizhzhia. [ 526 ] ukrainian drones struck the depot of the 51st main missile and artillery directorate in the village of barsovo , vladimir oblast . neighbouring villages were evacuated. [ 527 ] the russian ministry of defense acknowledged the explosion, which was caused by “safety protocol violation” that resulted in a fire. [ 528 ] a bmp-55 prototype, a t-55 tank converted to a troop carrier, was found abandoned and photographed somewhere in ukraine. it is the first one known to be deployed in the field. [ 529 ] ukraine received the first swedish saab 340 aew&c . it conducted two days of test flights over lviv. [ 530 ] nine people were killed in a russian drone strike on a bus in marhanets , dnipropetrovsk oblast. [ 531 ] ukrainian drones targeted the alabuga special economic zone in tatarstan, which is believed to host a shahed factory is said to be. airports in nizhnekamsk and kazan were closed. the russian mod claimed to have intercepted all drones. [ 532 ]

government of peace and unity (from april 2025) [ 10 ] 120,000 total fighters (14 april 2023, per saf) [ 33 ] a civil war between two major rival factions of the military government of sudan began during ramadan on 15 april 2023. the two opponent factions consist of the sudanese armed forces (saf) under abdel fattah al-burhan and the paramilitary rapid support forces (rsf) and its allies (collectively the janjaweed coalition) under the janjaweed leader hemedti . minor factions have also participated in the fighting, allying with either major combatant or remaining opposed to both; these include the darfur joint protection force ; the slm (al-nur) under abdul wahid al-nur ; and the splm-n under abdelaziz al-hilu . fighting has been concentrated around the capital city of khartoum (the largest and initial battle of the war) and the darfur region. [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] as of 14 november 2024, at least 61,000 people have died in khartoum state alone, of which 26,000 were a direct result of the violence. [ 39 ] as of 5 february 2025, over 8.8 million were internally displaced and more than 3.5 million others had fled the country as refugees, [ 35 ] and many civilians in darfur have been reported dead as part of the masalit massacres . [ 40 ] the war began with attacks by the rsf on government sites as airstrikes, artillery, and gunfire were reported across sudan. the cities of khartoum and omdurman were divided between the two warring factions, with al-burhan relocating his government to port sudan as rsf forces captured most of khartoum's government buildings. attempts by international powers to negotiate a ceasefire culminated in the treaty of jeddah in may 2023, which failed to stop the fighting and was ultimately abandoned. [ 41 ] over the next few months, a stalemate occurred, during which the two sides were joined by rebel groups who had previously fought against sudan's government. by mid-november, the minni minnawi and mustafa tambour factions of the sudan liberation movement officially joined the war in support of the saf, alongside the justice and equality movement (jem). [ 3 ] [ 5 ] in contrast, the tamazuj movement joined forces with the rsf, while the abdelaziz al-hilu faction of the sudan people's liberation movement–north attacked saf positions in the south of the country. [ 11 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] in october 2023, momentum began to swing toward the rsf, as the paramilitary defeated army forces in darfur and made gains in khartoum state , kordofan , and gezira state . since february 2024, the saf has made gains in omdurman. since june 2024, the rsf has made gains in sennar state . further negotiations between the warring sides have produced no significant results, while many countries have provided military or political support for either al-burhan or hemedti. [ 44 ] [ 45 ] in february 2025, the saf made notable gains in khartoum and khartoum north (alternatively referred to as bahri). [ 46 ] in march 2025, the saf retook khartoum, including the presidential palace and the airport, from the rsf. [ 47 ] [ 48 ] in august 2024, the integrated food security phase classification (ipc) famine review committee (frc) confirmed famine conditions in parts of north darfur . [ 49 ] since gaining independence in 1956, sudan has experienced 20 military coup attempts , the most of any african nation. [ 50 ] sudan has usually been ruled by the military, interspersed with short periods of democratic parliamentary rule . [ 51 ] [ 52 ] two civil wars – the first from 1955 to 1972 and the second, 1983 to 2005 – between the central government and the southern regions , which led to the independence of south sudan in 2011, killed 1.5 million people, and a conflict in the western region of darfur displaced two million people and killed more than 200,000 others. [ 53 ] by the turn of the 21st century, sudan's western darfur region had endured prolonged instability and social strife due to racial and ethnic tensions and disputes over land and water. in 2003, this situation erupted into a full-scale rebellion against government rule, against which president and military strongman omar al-bashir vowed to use forceful action. the resulting war in darfur was marked by widespread state-sponsored acts of violence, leading to charges of war crimes and genocide against al-bashir. [ 54 ] the initial phase of the conflict left approximately 300,000 dead and 2.7 million forcibly displaced; even though the intensity of the violence later declined, the situation in the region remained far from peaceful. [ 55 ] to crush uprisings by non-arab tribes in the nuba mountains , al-bashir relied upon the janjaweed , a collection of arab militias that were drawn from camel-trading tribes which were active in darfur and portions of chad . in 2013, al-bashir announced that the janjaweed would be reorganised as the rapid support forces (rsf) and he also announced that the rsf would be placed under the command of the janjaweed's commander mohamed hamdan dagalo , more commonly known as hemedti. [ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] the rsf perpetrated mass killings, mass rapes, pillage, torture, and destruction of villages. they were accused of committing ethnic cleansing against the fur , masalit , and zaghawa peoples. [ 58 ] leaders of the rsf have been indicted for genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity by the international criminal court (icc), [ 60 ] but hemedti was not personally implicated in the 2003–2004 atrocities. [ 55 ] in 2017, a new law gave the rsf the status of an "independent security force". [ 58 ] hemedti received several gold mines in darfur as patronage from al-bashir, and his personal wealth grew substantially. [ 59 ] [ 60 ] bashir sent rsf forces to quash a 2013 uprising in south darfur and deployed rsf units to fight in yemen and libya . [ 57 ] during this time, the rsf developed a working relationship with the russian private military outfit wagner group . [ 61 ] these developments ensured that rsf forces grew into the tens of thousands and came to possess thousands of armed pickup trucks which regularly patrolled the streets of khartoum. [ 61 ] the bashir regime allowed the rsf and other armed groups to proliferate to prevent threats to its security from within the armed forces, a practice known as " coup-proofing ". [ 62 ] in december 2018, protests against al-bashir's regime began, starting the first phase of the sudanese revolution . eight months of sustained civil disobedience were met with violent repression. [ 63 ] in april 2019, the military (including the rsf) ousted al-bashir in a coup d'état , ending his three decades of rule; the army established the transitional military council , a junta . [ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 63 ] bashir was imprisoned in khartoum; he was not turned over to the icc, which had issued warrants for his arrest on charges of war crimes . [ 64 ] protests calling for civilian rule continued; in june 2019, the tmc's security forces, which included both the rsf and the saf, perpetrated the khartoum massacre , in which more than a hundred demonstrators were killed [ 65 ] [ 57 ] [ 59 ] [ 63 ] and dozens were raped. [ 57 ] hemedti denied orchestrating the attack. [ 59 ] in august 2019, in response to international pressure and mediation by the african union and ethiopia, the military agreed to share power in an interim joint civilian-military unity government (the transitional sovereignty council ), headed by a civilian prime minister, abdalla hamdok , with elections to be held in 2023 . [ 54 ] [ 63 ] in october 2021, the military seized power in a coup led by sudanese armed forces (saf) leader abdel fattah al-burhan and hemedti. the transitional sovereignty council was reconstituted as a new military junta led by al-burhan, monopolizing power and halting sudan's transition to democracy . [ 64 ] [ 66 ] the sudan liberation movement (or army; slm, sla, or slm/a) is a rebel group active in darfur, primarily composed of members of non-arab ethnic groups [ 67 ] and established in response to their marginalization by the bashir regime. [ 68 ] [ 69 ] since 2006, the movement has split into several factions due to disagreements over the darfur peace agreement , with some factions joining the government in khartoum. [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] by 2023 the three most prominent factions were the slm-minnawi under minni minnawi , the slm-al-nur under abdul wahid al-nur , and the slm-tambour under mustafa tambour . the slm-minnawi and slm-tambour signed the 2020 juba peace agreement , ceasing hostilities and receiving political appointments, but the slm-al-nur refused to sign and kept fighting. [ 73 ] [ 74 ] the splm-n was founded by units of the predominantly south sudanese sudan people's liberation movement /army stationed in areas that remained in sudan following the south sudanese vote for independence in 2011 . these forces then led a rebellion in the southern states of south kordofan and blue nile a few months later. [ 75 ] in 2017, the splm-n split between a faction led by abdelaziz al-hilu and one led by malik agar , with al-hilu demanding secularism as a condition for peace while agar did not agree with this. [ 76 ] during the sudanese revolution, al-hilu's faction declared an indefinite unilateral ceasefire. [ 77 ] in 2020, a peace agreement was signed between the sudanese government and agar's faction, [ 72 ] with agar later joining the transitional sovereignty council in khartoum. al-hilu held out until he agreed to sign a separate peace agreement with the sudanese government a few months later. [ 78 ] further steps to consolidate the agreement stalled following the 2021 coup, and the al-hilu faction instead signed an agreement with the slm-al-nur and the sudanese communist party , agreeing to co-operate to draft a 'revolutionary charter' and remove the military from power. [ 79 ] in the months after the 2021 coup the already weak sudanese economy steeply declined, fueling wide protests demanding that the junta return power to civilian authorities. [ 80 ] tensions arose between al-burhan and hemedti over al-burhan's restoration to the office of old-guard islamist officials who had dominated the omar al-bashir government. hemedti saw the appointment of these officials as a signal that al-burhan was attempting to maintain the dominance of khartoum's traditional elite over sudanese politics. this was a danger to the rsf's political position, as said elites were hostile to hemedti due to his ethnic background as a darfuri arab. [ 81 ] hemedti's expression of regret over the october 2021 coup signalled a widening divide between him and al-burhan. [ 66 ] tensions between the rsf and the saf began to escalate in february 2023, as the rsf began to recruit members across sudan. [ 80 ] throughout february and early march the rsf built up in the sudanese capital of khartoum , until a deal was brokered on 11 march and the rsf withdrew. [ 80 ] [ 82 ] as part of this deal negotiations were conducted between the saf, rsf, and civilian leaders, but these negotiations were delayed and halted by political disagreements. [ 83 ] chief among the disputes was the integration of the rsf into the military: the rsf insisted on a 10-year timetable for its integration into the regular army, while the army demanded integration within two years. [ 84 ] [ 85 ] other contested issues included the status given to rsf officers in the future hierarchy, and whether rsf forces should be under the command of the army chief rather than sudan's commander-in-chief, al-burhan. [ 86 ] on 11 april 2023, rsf forces deployed near the city of merowe as well as in khartoum . [ 87 ] government forces ordered them to leave and were refused. this led to clashes when rsf forces took control of the soba military base south of khartoum. [ 87 ] on 13 april, rsf forces began their mobilization, raising fears of a potential rebellion against the junta. the saf declared the mobilization illegal. [ 88 ] on 15 april 2023, the rsf attacked saf bases across sudan, including khartoum and its airport . [ 84 ] [ 89 ] there were clashes at the headquarters of the state broadcaster, sudan tv , which was later captured by rsf forces. [ 90 ] bridges and roads in khartoum and its hinterland were closed by rsf command. [ 91 ] the next day saw a saf counteroffensive, with the army retaking merowe airport alongside the headquarters of sudan tv and the state radio. [ 90 ] the sudan civil aviation authority closed the country's airspace as fighting began. [ 92 ] telecommunications provider mtn shut down internet services, and by 23 april there was a near-total internet outage attributed to attacks on the electricity grid. [ 93 ] [ 94 ] sudanese international trade began to break down, with maersk , one of the largest shipping companies in the world, announcing a pause on new shipments to the country. [ 95 ] hemedti directed his forces to capture or kill al-burhan, and rsf units engaged in pitched and bloody combat with the republican guard . ultimately al-burhan managed to evade capture or assassination, but his base at the sudanese armed forces headquarters was placed under rsf siege, rendering him unable to leave khartoum. [ 73 ] [ 96 ] in an interview with al jazeera , hemedti accused al-burhan and his commanders of forcing the rsf to start the war by scheming to bring deposed leader omar al-bashir back to power. [ 91 ] he called for the international community to intervene against al-burhan, claiming that the rsf was fighting against radical islamic militants. [ 97 ] following the first few days of war the saf brought in reinforcements from the ethiopian border. [ 98 ] although a ceasefire was announced for eid al-fitr , fighting continued across the country. [ 99 ] [ 100 ] combat was described as particularly intense along the highway from khartoum to port sudan and in the industrial zone of al-bagair. [ 101 ] intercommunal clashes were reported in blue nile state and in geneina . [ 102 ] [ 103 ] by the beginning of may the saf claimed to have weakened the rsf's combat capabilities and repelled its advances in multiple regions. [ 104 ] the sudanese police deployed its central reserve forces in the streets of khartoum in support of the saf, claiming to have arrested several hundred rsf fighters. [ 105 ] the saf announced it was launching an all-out attack on rsf in khartoum using air strikes and artillery. [ 106 ] air strikes and ground offensives against the rsf over the next few days caused significant damage to infrastructure, but failed to dislodge rsf forces from their positions. [ 107 ] [ 108 ] following further threats to his life from hemedti, al-burhan gave a public video address from his besieged base at the army headquarters, vowing to continue fighting. [ 109 ] [ 110 ] on 19 may, al-burhan officially removed hemedti as his deputy in the transitional sovereignty council and replaced him with former rebel leader and council member malik agar . [ 111 ] with al-burhan trapped in khartoum, agar became de facto leader of the sudanese government, assuming responsibility for peace negotiations, international visits and the day-to-day running of the country. [ 73 ] international attention to the conflict resulted in the united nations human rights council calling a special session to address the violence, voting to increase monitoring of human rights abuses. [ 112 ] on 6 may, delegates from the saf and the rsf met directly for the first time in jeddah , saudi arabia, for what was described by saudi arabia and the united states as "pre-negotiation talks". [ 113 ] after diplomatic lobbying from the saudis and americans the warring sides signed the treaty of jeddah on 20 may, vowing to ensure the safe passage of civilians, protect relief workers, and prohibit the use of civilians as human shields . [ 114 ] the agreement did not include a ceasefire, and clashes resumed in geneina , causing more casualties. [ 114 ] the united nations under-secretary-general for humanitarian affairs martin griffiths expressed frustration at the lack of commitment from both sides to end the fighting. [ 115 ] the situation remained volatile, with both sides trading blame for attacks on churches, hospitals, and embassies. [ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] casualties mounted, particularly in geneina, where arab militias loyal to the rsf were accused of atrocities against non-arab residents. [ 119 ] a temporary ceasefire was signed and faced challenges as fighting persisted in khartoum, and the agreed-upon ceasefire time saw further violence. [ 120 ] between 28 and 97 people were reportedly killed by the rsf and arab militias when they attacked the predominantly masalit town of misterei in west darfur on 28 may. [ 121 ] as june began, khartoum witnessed tank battles resulting in casualties. [ 122 ] [ 123 ] the rsf took control of several important cultural and government buildings, including the national museum of sudan and the yarmouk military industrial complex . [ 124 ] [ 125 ] acute food insecurity affected a significant portion of sudan's population. [ 126 ] [ 127 ] by july, al-burhan was still trapped at the army headquarters and unable to leave, and to break him out the saf elected to send a column of troops to lift the siege of the base. this force was ambushed by the rsf and defeated, with the paramilitary claiming it had killed hundreds of soldiers and captured 90 vehicles, along with the column's commander. [ 128 ] in response to the escalating violence in khartoum, the saf increased the intensity of their airstrikes and artillery bombardment, leading to heightened civilian casualties often numbering in the dozens per strike. [ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] shelling by the rsf also increased in intensity, leading to many civilian casualties in turn. [ 132 ] [ 133 ] heavy fighting continued in khartoum throughout august, with clashes breaking out across the city. the rsf laid siege to the saf's armoured corps base, breaching its defences and taking control of surrounding neighbourhoods. [ 134 ] [ 135 ] the saf also made offensives, with the rsf-controlled republican palace and yarmouk complex coming under saf air bombardment. an offensive was launched against yarmouk, but this was beaten back after the rsf shipped in reinforcements. [ 136 ] one of the few remaining bridges between khartoum and khartoum north was also destroyed by the saf, in an attempt to deny the rsf freedom of movement. [ 137 ] on 24 august an saf operation successfully rescued al-burhan from his besieged base at the army headquarters, allowing him to head to port sudan and hold a cabinet meeting there. [ 138 ] [ 139 ] ceasefires between the warring parties were announced but often violated, leading to further clashes. the saf and rsf engaged in mutual blame for incidents, while the sudanese government took action against international envoys. [ 140 ] the saudi embassy in khartoum was attacked and evacuations from an orphanage were carried out amid the chaos. [ 141 ] amidst the turmoil, sudan faced diplomatic strains with egypt, leading to challenges for sudanese refugees seeking entry. [ 142 ] [ 143 ] with al-burhan out of khartoum for the first time since the start of the war, he was able to fly to egypt and hold a meeting with the egyptian president abdel fattah al-sisi . [ 144 ] following this visit al-burhan went on a tour of numerous countries, heading to south sudan, qatar, eritrea, turkey, and uganda. [ 145 ] he then proceeded to new york city as head of the sudanese delegation to the 78th united nations general assembly , where he urged the international community to declare the rsf a terrorist organization. [ 146 ] [ 147 ] the abdelaziz al-hilu faction of the sudan people's liberation movement–north (splm-n) broke a long-standing ceasefire agreement in june, attacking saf units in kadugli , kurmuk and dalang , the latter coinciding with an attack by the rsf. the saf claimed to have repelled the attacks, [ 42 ] [ 11 ] while the rebels claimed to have attacked in retaliation for the death of one of their soldiers at the hands of the saf and vowed to free the region from "military occupation". [ 77 ] more than 35,000 were displaced by the fighting. [ 77 ] speculation arose as to whether the attacks were part of an unofficial alliance between al-hilu and the rsf or an attempt by al-hilu to strengthen his position in future negotiations concerning his group. [ 148 ] civil society organizations supporting the splm-n claimed its operations sought to protect civilians from possible attacks by the rsf. [ 149 ] al-hilu's faction launched further offensives in july, moving into south kordofan and gaining control of several saf bases. [ 150 ] [ 151 ] in response the saf brought in artillery and heavily bombarded splm-n positions. [ 150 ] further attacks by the group largely petered out after this, with an assault on kadugli in september being pushed back by the saf. [ 152 ] in february 2025, the splm-n (al-hilu) signed the sudan founding charter drafted by the rsf-led government of peace and unity , officially allying itself with the rsf. [ 153 ] in darfur, fighting and bloodshed were particularly fierce around the city of geneina , where hundreds died and extensive destruction occurred. [ 154 ] rsf forces engaged in frequent acts of violence against the masalit population of geneina, leading to accusations of ethnic cleansing . [ 155 ] on 4 august the rsf claimed that it had taken full control over all of central darfur . [ 156 ] a united nations investigation discovered numerous mass graves in darfur that contained masalit civilians. [ 157 ] the rsf and arab militias were additionally accused of having killed lawyers, human rights monitors, doctors and non-arab tribal leaders. [ 158 ] the governor of west darfur , khamis abakar , was abducted and killed by armed men in june, hours after accusing the rsf of genocide and calling for international intervention in a tv interview. [ 159 ] the saf, for their part, conducted indiscriminate airstrikes against darfur that killed many civilians, especially in nyala,sudan . [ 160 ] tribal and rebel groups in darfur began to declare allegiance to one or the other of the warring parties. a faction of the darfur-based sudan liberation movement led by mustafa tambour (slm-t) joined the conflict in support of the saf. [ 3 ] in contrast the controversial tamazuj rebel group formally declared its alliance with the rsf, joined by the leaders of seven arab tribes, including that of hemedti's. [ 43 ] [ 161 ] as september arrived both sides made offensives in darfur. the rsf took control of several towns in west darfur and also attacked the market of al-fashir , the capital of north darfur . [ 162 ] saf offensives saw success in central darfur , with the army retaking parts of zalingei from the rsf. [ 163 ] fighting in darfur also began to increasingly spill over into north kordofan , with the saf attacking rsf positions in the state capital of el-obeid and clashes over the town of um rawaba . [ 164 ] both sides made withdrawals to end the month, with the rsf retreating from um rawaba while the saf withdrew from tawila . [ 165 ] [ 166 ] by october 2023, the saf in darfur was experiencing acute shortages in supplies due to rsf-imposed sieges and had failed to utilize its air superiority to stem rsf advances. [ 167 ] on 26 october, the rsf captured nyala , sudan's fourth-largest city , after seizing control of the saf's 16th infantry division headquarters. [ 168 ] the fall of nyala, a strategic city with an international airport and border connections to central africa, allowed the rsf to receive international supplies more easily and concentrate its forces on other sudanese cities. [ 169 ] after nyala's fall, rsf fighters turned their focus to zalingei , the capital of central darfur. the saf's 21st infantry division, stationed in zalingei, fled the city without a fight and allowed the rsf to take it over. [ 170 ] in geneina, reports emerged that tribal elders were attempting to broker the surrender of the saf garrison in the city to prevent bloodshed. [ 171 ] the army rejected the proposal, raising fears of an imminent rsf assault on the city and causing civilians to flee across the border into chad. [ 172 ] the rsf besieged the headquarters of the saf's 15th infantry division in geneina, giving the garrison a six-hour ultimatum to surrender. [ 173 ] the base was captured two days later when the 15th withdrew from the area before fleeing to chad. [ 174 ] those left behind, numbering in the hundreds, were taken prisoner and paraded in rsf media with signs of abuse. [ 174 ] witnesses later reported mass atrocities perpetrated by the rsf in the city shortly after its seizure, with a local rebel group claiming up to 2,000 people were massacred in geneina's satellite town of ardamata . [ 175 ] with geneina's fall, ed daein and al-fashir were the last remaining capitals in darfur under government control, with both cities under heavy rsf pressure. [ 171 ] [ 174 ] the rsf stormed and plundered the town of umm keddada , east of al-fashir, after the saf garrison withdrew. [ 175 ] saf troops in al-fashir itself were reported to be running low on food, water, and medicine due to the city being under siege, and external forces noted the saf seemed incapable of stopping the rsf advance. [ 176 ] [ 177 ] ed daein fell in the early hours of 21 november, with rsf forces taking control of the city after seizing the headquarters of the saf's 20th infantry division. [ 178 ] saf garrisons in east darfur subsequently abandoned their positions and withdrew, allowing the rsf to occupy the area. [ 179 ] in response to rsf gains in darfur and subsequent abuses, the justice and equality movement , sudan liberation movement/army (minnawi) , and other smaller rebel factions renounced their neutrality and declared war on the rsf. [ 5 ] attempts by other nations and international organisations to negotiate peace had largely been dormant since the failure of the treaty of jeddah, but in late october the rsf and saf met once more in jeddah to attempt to negotiate peace. [ 180 ] this new round of talks was a failure, with neither side willing to commit to a ceasefire. instead, the warring factions agreed to open channels for humanitarian aid. [ 181 ] on 3 december negotiations were indefinitely suspended due to the failure of both the saf and the rsf to open up aid channels. [ 182 ] with the failure of the talks in jeddah, the east african intergovernmental authority on development (igad) hosted a peace summit in early december. earlier attempts by igad to open negotiations had floundered after the saf had accused kenyan president william ruto of supporting the rsf. [ 183 ] igad's talks appeared to make more progress than the jeddah negotiations, with hemedti and al-burhan agreeing to meet in person at some point in the future. [ 184 ] the rsf attacked the town of wad ashana in north kordofan on 1 october along a key commercial route. [ 185 ] [ 186 ] in west kordofan, an uptick in fighting was reported, with the rsf assaulting a "vital" oil field in baleela, south of al-fulah . [ 187 ] geolocated footage showed rsf fighters celebrating around baleela airport after allegedly capturing it. [ 188 ] the battle of khartoum continued with the rsf seizing the town of al-aylafoun, southeast of the capital, on 6 october. in the process, the paramilitary gained control of key oil infrastructure. [ 189 ] [ 190 ] by late october the rsf controlled most of khartoum but had failed to seize key military bases, while al-burhan's government had largely relocated to port sudan. [ 191 ] the rsf sought to capitalize on its gains by stepping up attacks on saf positions in khartoum and omdurman. days of fighting culminated in the destruction of the shambat bridge , which connected khartoum north to omdurman over the nile; the bridge's destruction severed a critical rsf supply chain. [ 192 ] this effectively cut the rsf off from its forces in omdurman, giving the saf a strategic advantage. [ 193 ] in an attempt to gain a new crossing over the nile and supply its forces in omdurman, the rsf launched an assault on the jebel aulia dam in the village of jabal awliya . [ 194 ] as jebel aulia could not be destroyed without flooding khartoum, its capture would give the rsf a path over the nile the saf could not easily remove. a week-long battle commenced over the dam and its surrounding village, which ended in an rsf victory. the force captured the dam on 20 november, and all saf resistance ceased in the village the following day. [ 195 ] [ 196 ] on 5 december, local militias along with rsf soldiers attacked splm-n (al-hilu) forces in the village of tukma, southeast of dalang in south kordofan, resulting in the deaths of 4 people and the destruction of the village. [ 12 ] the rsf leadership, not wanting hostilities with the then-neutral al-hilu faction to escalate, issued a statement condemning this attack and denouncing it as "tribal violence". [ 197 ] on 8 december, the rsf entered gedaref state for the first time. [ 197 ] pushing south from their gains around jebel aulia and khartoum, rsf forces began to move into gezira state on 15 december, advancing toward its capital wad madani . [ 198 ] [ 199 ] elsewhere in gezira the rsf made major gains, taking control of the city of rufaa in the state's east and entering the butana region. [ 200 ] after several days of fighting the rsf seized the hantoob bridge on wad madani's eastern outskirts, crossing the blue nile and entering the city. [ 200 ] the army put up little resistance in wad madani itself, the 1st division withdrawing from the city as the rsf took over. [ 201 ] the fall of wad madani was viewed as a major blow to the saf, as it dramatically widened the frontline and opened up large parts of the country to potential rsf offensives. [ 201 ] the city's fall allowed the rsf to capture most of gezira and to make inroads in white nile state , capturing the town of el geteina . [ 202 ] within a few days rsf fighters had advanced to within 25 km of sennar , the largest city in sennar state . [ 202 ] over the next few weeks rsf forces ventured into rural areas of al qadarif state and river nile state , without establishing a significant presence. in sennar state the rsf made some further minor advances but had not attacked sennar city by the year's end. [ 203 ] amid the deteriorating situation, the saf was reported to be arming civilians while government officials in the east called on the population to mobilize. [ 204 ] al-burhan gave a widely promoted public speech to soldiers in red sea state , promising to arm civilian militias to fight the rsf and to fight against 'colonialism', which was viewed by observers as a reference to the united arab emirates support of the rsf. [ 205 ] following the fall of wad madani efforts by igad to negotiate a ceasefire made progress, as the saf's weakened position made them more eager to enter talks. whereas previously opposition from islamist political groups to negotiation had prevented al-burhan from committing to a specific date, now both he and hemedti agreed to meet on 28 december. [ 201 ] [ 206 ] a day before the meeting was due, it was cancelled as hemedti recanted his desire to attend. [ 207 ] instead the rsf leader went on a diplomatic tour, travelling on a chartered emirati jet and meeting with several african national leaders. [ 208 ] one visit that was particularly promoted was his visit to rwanda , where he met with rwandan president paul kagame and visited the kigali genocide memorial . [ 205 ] on the tour hemedti also met with former prime minister hamdok and his taqaddum organisation in addis ababa , with the rsf agreeing in a declaration negotiated with the taqaddum to release political prisoners, open up humanitarian aid corridors and negotiate further with the saf. [ 209 ] this tour was regarded by observers as an attempt by hemedti to portray himself as the leader of sudan and improve his international image, as his reputation had been severely damaged since the fall of wad madani due to large-scale looting by rsf fighters. [ 208 ] on 5 january, al-burhan vowed to continue the war against the rsf and rejected the latest peace efforts, declaring that war crimes committed by the rsf precluded negotiation. [ 210 ] on 14 january, both hemedti and burhan received official invitations from igad to attend its upcoming summit on 18 january. hemedti agreed to attend, but burhan refused to do so. on 16 january, the sudanese government suspended its ties with igad, accusing the body of violating sudanese sovereignty.this effectively marked the end of igad's attempts to mediate peace talks. [ 211 ] as 2024 began the rsf made attacks into south kordofan , defeating saf forces in the town of habila in the nuba mountains and pushing toward dalang . [ 212 ] on 7 january the rsf attacked saf positions in dalang, meeting fierce resistance from the army and civilian militias. [ 205 ] [ 213 ] during the fighting the splm-n (al-hilu) entered the city, taking control of several neighbourhoods. splm-n forces proceeded to attack the rsf, and the paramilitary retreated from the city. [ 214 ] rsf fighters withdrawing from dalang entered the city of muglad in west kordofan , easily taking control as the city had no organised saf presence. west kordofan had been relatively free of fighting for several months due to a local truce brokered by leaders of the messiria tribe , but as tensions escalated rumours spread that the rsf was planning an attack on the encircled city of babanusa and the saf 22nd infantry division garrisoning it. [ 214 ] in january 2024, the rsf focused on consolidating its gains in gezira state . fighting was reported on 17 january east of el manaqil , the last major town not under rsf control. the saf delivered weapons to the city by helicopter, including selectively distributing them among civilians in the town, attempting to bolster its defences. sudan's national intelligence and security service (niss) selectively recruited and armed civilians based on perceived loyalty. [ 215 ] on 24 january 2024, the rsf launched an attack on babanusa after encircling the city for months. by 25 january, the rsf gained control of the city centre and entered the headquarters of the 22nd infantry division. [ 216 ] until march 2024, the rsf maintained its position in gezira state but was unable to break through. [ 217 ] the rsf is recruiting in gezira state to try to capture territory in el-gadarif from the saf. [ 218 ] the jem , which has allied with the saf, helped the saf build up its forces in el-gadarif for a counteroffensive to try to retake wad madani . in april 2024, the saf and its allies began the counteroffensive, attacking from the east and west of wad madani in an attempt to retake it. [ 219 ] clashes were reported in al-madina arab on 15 april. [ 220 ] in december 2024, the saf launched an offensive in southern gezira. the saf was able to make small progress, which involved recapturing the town of wad el-haddad, a town on the border of sennar state. it also was able to recapture um al-qura , but the rsf reoccupied the village. [ 221 ] in january 2025, the saf made the first major military operation of 2025. the army was able to make large gains in gezira and some gains in north kordofan. on 8 january, the saf had recaptured haj-abdallah after a tense battle that inflicted losses on the rsf. the saf stated that seven rsf vehicles were destroyed. [ 222 ] a day later, the saf attacked rsf positions in al-shabarga in the southeastern part of the state, led by field commander bassam abu satour, leading to the rsf's withdrawal and the saf recapturing the city, while in the western part of the state, the saf took control of the villages mahla, tahla, and al-kumar al-jaaliyeen. [ 223 ] on 10 january, the saf recaptured um al-qura while the sudan shield forces took wad al-abyad. [ 224 ] these successful offensives led to the saf retaking control of wad madani on 11 january from three fronts. after advancing in gezira and khartoum, the saf launched a military operation in north kordofan for the first time, after being on the defensive in darfur and kordofan from the start of the war. the saf's "sayyad force", captured the entirety of the umm ruwaba district. [ 225 ] by the start of february, the saf had recaptured al-hasaheisa, tambul , and rufa'a . this left the rsf in control of only northwestern gezira . [ 225 ] the saf then liberated the town of er rahad on 19 february, and by 23 february, the saf lifted the almost two-year siege of el obeid . [ 226 ] [ 227 ] the saf gained ground in omdurman in february 2024, linking up their forces in the northern part of the city and relieving a 10-month siege of their forces in the city centre. the saf also took control of the al-hilal stadium . [ 228 ] as of february 2024, the omdurman front is the only area in sudan where the saf has carried out a sustained offensive operation and represents the first breakthrough for the saf. [ 228 ] on 12 march, the saf defeated an attempted rsf counteroffensive in omdurman and took control of the headquarters of the sudan national broadcasting corporation . [ 229 ] the rsf maintains its control of khartoum and continues to threaten khartoum north. [ 230 ] as of april 2024, fighting in khartoum state is ongoing, with the rsf in control of the southern and western parts of omdurman and the saf in control of the northern and eastern parts of omdurman, with the rsf controlling the majority of khartoum and khartoum north. the saf continued to prepare an offensive to relieve its surrounded bases in khartoum north . [ 231 ] as of march 2025, saf controls majority of the city. on 29 march, saf forces announced the control of the libya market in omdurman and seized weapons and equipment left behind by the rsf. [ 232 ] on the same day, saf launched new offensives into the city of ombada , west of omdurman. [ 233 ] on 15 april, during the battle of el fasher , at least nine civilians were killed in a renewed offensive by the rsf on the city of al-fashir in north darfur. [ 234 ] the joint darfur force declared war on the rsf and allied with the saf. [ 235 ] [ 236 ] the fighting in el fasher has diverted saf resources from other areas, hampering planned counter-offensives to retake khartoum and wad madani. in particular, the saf has been using its limited aviation resources to carry out airstrikes in north darfur and resupply el fasher using airdrops. [ 237 ] since april 2024, the conflict had been escalating in el fasher, while the civilians remained trapped with no safety or food. in a june 2024 report, the international crisis group said the intensifying battle could lead to mass slaughter, and that there was a need for all sides to de-escalate. the report said the un and the us should broker the de-escalation and must put pressure on the rsf and its main supporters, including the united arab emirates and egypt. crisis group said the uae should push the rsf to stand down, and urged all parties to allow the civilians to flee, open the region for aid delivery and resume national peace talks. [ 238 ] on 14 june 2024, the saf announced that it had killed ali yaqoub gibril , a top rsf commander, in el fasher. the united states had sanctioned yagoub in may 2024 for endangering civilians in darfur. [ 239 ] in june 2024, the new york times reported that more than 40 villages had been burned in el fasher since april 2024. [ 240 ] fighting is ongoing in el fasher, which remains the saf's last holdout in darfur. [ 241 ] as of september 2024, the rsf has advanced into central areas of el fasher, with the saf's territorial control at its lowest point since intense fighting began in may 2024. [ 242 ] as of may 2024, fighting is ongoing in babanusa , west kordofan. the rsf is conducting an offensive to attempt to take control of west kordofan. [ 243 ] fighting was also reported in north kordofan. [ 244 ] on 20 june 2024, the rsf captured al-fulah , the capital of west kordofan , after the saf withdrew from the city after several hours of fighting. the saf retreated to babanusa, its one remaining base in kordofan. [ 245 ] in may 2024, the rsf launched attacks against the saf between khartoum state and river nile state , as well as in white nile state near the border with gezira state. the saf prepared its forces in river nile state, ahead of a potential invasion of khartoum bahri. [ 246 ] in june 2024, the rsf was still in control of khartoum and khartoum north, though the saf controlled one enclave in each that it supplies by airdrop. [ 247 ] in late june 2024, the rsf began an assault in the areas surrounding the city of sennar. rsf forces struck out to the west of the city, causing the saf to bring in reinforcements in anticipation of an attack on sennar itself. [ 248 ] instead rsf forces avoided sennar and attacked south towards singa , the capital of sennar state, capturing the lightly defended town on 29 june. [ 248 ] [ 249 ] this prevented the saf from reinforcing sennar from the south, placing the city under increased pressure. [ 248 ] following the fall of singa, saf resistance collapsed across much of southern sennar, which led to the rsf occupying the towns of dinder , mazmoun and wad an-nail with minimal saf resistance. [ 250 ] a united force consisting of the gedaref -based 2nd saf infantry division and a battalion of the jem assaulted and retook dinder on 1 july, but were driven out again by the rsf over the next few days. [ 251 ] on 20 july, the rsf announced the death of brigadier general abdel rahman al-bishi, its head of operations in sennar and blue nile states , with sudanese media reporting that he had been killed in a saf airstrike. [ 252 ] on 3 august, the rsf launched its first attack on blue nile state since the beginning of the war, with the group and the saf contesting control over al-tadamun. [ 253 ] on 15 august 2024, the galgani massacre was carried out by the rsf, which killed at least 108 people, [ 254 ] including at least 24 women and children. [ 255 ] as september 2024 came, for the first time since the start of the war the balance of power seemed to be tipping towards the saf. on 26 september, the saf launched a major offensive against rsf positions in khartoum. [ 256 ] the attack on the city came from three fronts striking from the south, east and west of the capital. [ 257 ] saf airstrikes, which killed four and wounded 14, began at dawn followed by clashes within the city. the saf reportedly captured three key bridges connecting khartoum to other nearby cities, including the omdurman bridge which had previously acted as a line of separation between government and rsf control. [ 258 ] [ 259 ] faced with an elusive enemy, the saf became bogged down in urban fighting , with rsf snipers routinely paralyzing infantry advances. [ 257 ] october 2024 was the deadliest month for sudanese civilians since the war began. in khartoum, the rsf have relentlessly shelled areas controlled by the saf, which has amounted to daily indiscriminate bombardments of civilian areas. escalating saf airstrikes on rsf positions have caused dozens of civilian deaths. [ 257 ] in october 2024, the saf also launched a counteroffensives in the states of sennar and gezira , which were successfully recaptured from the rsf. [ 260 ] starting on 20 october 2024, the rsf carried out the 2024 eastern gezira state massacres , which killed at least 300 people and wounded at least 200 more. [ 261 ] according to a report by the french newspaper le monde , as of november 2024 the war in sudan has possibly entered its most dangerous phase since it began in april 2023. both the saf and rsf have officially ruled out settling the civil war through negotiations, with the only option on the table being total war . during the recent rainy season which brought a lull in the fighting, each side rearmed and restructured their forces. [ 257 ] many ordinary sudanese, extending to the most serious critics of the saf, have increasingly supported the saf in response to rsf war crimes and atrocities. the saf has become increasingly dependent on islamist networks, as these movements have mobilized many civilians from popular resistance brigades . the al-bara' ibn malik battalion in particular is presently fighting on the khartoum front lines against the rsf and has consequently gained popularity. [ 262 ] on 23 november, the saf retook singa following an offensive. [ 263 ] [ 264 ] the saf retook wad madani , the capital of gezira state on 11 january 2025. [ 265 ] on 8 february 2025, the saf regained control of nearly all of khartoum north as it intensified its offensive, and was preparing to retake the capital of khartoum itself. [ 266 ] on 24 february 2025, the rsf claimed responsibility for downing a russian-made ilyushin aircraft in nyala. meanwhile, the rsf declared a rival government in nairobi , the capital of kenya, which the saf-aligned administration refused to recognize. [ 267 ] [ 268 ] on 20 march 2025, the saf announced it was within 500 metres of the presidential palace [ 269 ] and captured it on the next day. [ 270 ] on 22 march, the saf also recaptured the headquarters of the central bank of sudan and the general intelligence service in khartoum. [ 271 ] it also retook tuti island , situated at the confluence of the blue nile and the white nile , after advancing through the tuti bridge . [ 272 ] on 26 march, they retook khartoum international airport and jebel aulia, regarded as the rsf's last stronghold in the capital, [ 273 ] with al-burhan proclaiming the liberation of khartoum later in the day. [ 274 ] in april 2025, the rsf launched a major offensive in north darfur , aiming to capture el fasher, the last state capital in the region under saf control. beginning on 11 april, rsf ground and aerial assaults struck el fasher and surrounding displacement camps, including zamzam and abu shouk. by 13 april, the rsf claimed control of zamzam camp after intense fighting that left over 200 civilians dead, including children and aid workers. [ 275 ] [ 276 ] the saf denied rsf accusations of militarizing the camp, while rights groups documented widespread abuses by rsf fighters, including targeted killings and sexual violence. [ 275 ] [ 277 ] according to a report published by le monde in november 2024, the war may have killed over 150,000 civilians through the combined tolls of bombardments, massacres, starvation and disease. [ 257 ] a november 2024 report from the london school of hygiene & tropical medicine estimated more than 61,000 deaths in khartoum state alone, for the period between april 2023 and june 2024. [ 278 ] early in the conflict, doctors on the ground warned that reported figures did not include all casualties as people could not reach hospitals due to difficulties in movement. [ 279 ] soon after the war broke out, a spokesperson for the sudanese red crescent was quoted as saying that the number of casualties "was not small". [ 91 ] the sultanate of dar masalit claimed on 20 june 2023 that more than 5,000 people were killed and about 8,000 were wounded in fighting in west darfur alone, [ 280 ] while a masalit tribal leader told the sudanese news outlet ayin network on 22 july 2023 that more than 10,000 people had been killed in the state. [ 281 ] sudanese prosecutors recorded over 500 missing persons cases across the country, some of which were enforced disappearances , and were mostly blamed on the rsf. [ 282 ] on 2 may 2024, a us senate hearing on the war estimated that between 15,000 and 30,000 people had died, but considered that to be an underestimation by a factor of 10 to 15 times, saying the real death toll could be as high as 150,000. [ 283 ] as of 27 may 2024, armed conflict location and event data project data reported 17,044 fatalities. [ 284 ] on 29 march 2025, the sudanese group for defending rights and freedoms said that it had recorded 50,000 missing persons cases since the beginning of the war. [ 285 ] in geneina , west darfur, ethnic clashes that began in the last week of april 2023 had killed at least 1,100 people, [ 286 ] while the sultanate of dar masalit claimed that more than 5,000 people were killed and about 8,000 were wounded in the city. [ 280 ] in july 2023, a masalit tribal leader claimed that more than 10,000 people had been killed in west darfur alone, and that 80% of geneina's residents had fled. [ 281 ] massacres were recorded in towns such as tawila [ 287 ] and misterei , [ 121 ] while a mass grave was discovered in geneina containing the bodies of 87 people killed in clashes. [ 157 ] several intellectuals, politicians, professionals and nobility were assassinated. most of these atrocities were blamed on the rsf and allied arab militias. the uk government, [ 288 ] witnesses and other observers described the violence in the region as tantamount to ethnic cleansing or even genocide , with non-arab groups such as the masalit being the primary victims. [ 287 ] mujeebelrahman yagoub, assistant commissioner for refugees in west darfur called the violence worse than the war in darfur in 2003 and the rwandan genocide in 1994. [ 289 ] civilians, including 15 syrians, [ 291 ] 15 ethiopians [ 290 ] and nine eritreans [ 293 ] have been killed across the country. an indian national working in khartoum died after being hit by a stray bullet on 15 april. [ 295 ] two americans were killed, including a professor working in the university of khartoum who was stabbed to death while evacuating. [ 294 ] [ 297 ] a two-year-old girl from turkey was killed while her parents were injured after their house was struck by a rocket on 18 april. [ 296 ] ten students from the democratic republic of the congo were killed in an saf airstrike on the international university of africa in khartoum on 4 june. [ 292 ] the saf claimed that the egyptian assistant military attaché was killed by rsf fire while driving his car in khartoum, which was denied by the egyptian ambassador. [ 298 ] two greek nationals trapped in a church on 15 april sustained leg injuries when caught in crossfire while trying to leave. [ 299 ] [ 300 ] a filipino migrant worker [ 301 ] and an indonesian student at a school in khartoum were injured by stray bullets. [ 302 ] on 17 april, the european union ambassador to sudan, aidan o'hara of ireland, was assaulted by unidentified "armed men wearing military fatigues" in his home, he suffered minor injuries and was able to resume working on 19 april. [ 303 ] [ 304 ] on 23 april, a french evacuation convoy was shot at, injuring one person. [ 305 ] the french government later confirmed the casualty to be a french soldier. [ 306 ] an employee of the egyptian embassy was shot and injured during an evacuation mission. [ 307 ] [ 308 ] the outbreak of violence has led foreign governments to monitor the situation in sudan and move toward the evacuation and repatriation of their nationals. among some countries with several expatriates in sudan are egypt , which has more than 10,000 citizens in the country, [ 309 ] and the united states, which has more than 16,000 citizens, most of whom are dual nationals . [ 310 ] efforts at extraction were hampered by the fighting within the capital khartoum, particularly in and around the airport. this has forced evacuations to be undertaken by road via port sudan on the red sea , which lies about 650 km (400 miles) northeast of khartoum. [ 311 ] from where they were airlifted or ferried directly to their home countries or third ones. other evacuations were undertaken through overland border crossings or airlifts from diplomatic missions and other designated locations with direct involvement of the militaries of some home countries. some transit hubs used during the evacuation include the port of jeddah in saudi arabia and djibouti , which hosts military bases of the united states, china, japan, france, and other european countries. [ 312 ] the conflict was marked by heavy indiscriminate shelling, gunfire, and airstrikes on markets and populated residential neighbourhoods, causing a high number of fatalities. hospitals were targeted during aerial bombings and artillery fire, and medical supplies were looted. these attacks severely impacted sudan's healthcare system, disrupting medical services and leaving the majority of the hospitals in conflict-affected states out of service. the un declared sudan the most dangerous country for humanitarian workers after south sudan . [ 313 ] in geneina , west darfur , the rsf and arab militias killed more than 15,000 non-arab people. [ 314 ] on 22 july, a masalit tribal leader claimed that more than 10,000 people had been killed in west darfur alone, and that 80% of geneina's residents had fled. massacres against the masalit were recorded in towns such as tawila , sirba , ardamata , kutum , and misterei , while a mass graves were discovered around geneina. the uk [ 315 ] [ 316 ] and us [ 317 ] [ 318 ] governments, witnesses, and other observers described the violence in the region as tantamount to ethnic cleansing [ 316 ] [ 319 ] or even genocide, [ 320 ] [ 321 ] [ 322 ] [ 323 ] with non-arab groups such as the masalit being the primary victims. the rsf and arab militias are also accused of widespread robberies, looting food meant to feed 4.4 million people, and sexual violence against sudanese and foreign women, particularly masalit and non-arab women. ngos estimate that the actual figure of sexual violence victims could be as high as 4,400. [ 324 ] the un was urged to start an inquiry, and governments were encouraged to allocate resources to aid survivors. the rsf and arab militias in sudan are also accused of targeted torture and killings of intellectuals, politicians, professionals, and tribal leaders. notable victims include adam zakaria is'haq, a physician and human rights advocate, and khamis abakar , the governor of west darfur, who was kidnapped, tortured, and executed. [ 325 ] the rsf also targeted the families of their opponents, such as mustafa tambour 's family. the saf and rsf are accused of threatening, attacking, and killing journalists and activists during the conflict. the sudanese journalists syndicate documented over 40 violations in may 2023 alone. several journalists were injured or killed, and 13 newspapers ceased operations. humanitarian workers were also targeted, with 18 killed and many others detained. in july 2024 amnesty international reported that large numbers of recently manufactured weapons and ammunition were being transported into sudan from china, russia, turkey, yemen, the uae and serbia. [ 329 ] [ 330 ] on 7 june 2023, hissein alamine tchaw-tchaw, a chadian dissident who belongs to the same ethnic group as hemedti and claims to be the leader of the movement for the fight of the oppressed in chad (mfoc), which is fighting the government of president mahamat déby , posted a video showing his participation in an rsf attack on the yarmouk munitions factory in khartoum. [ 331 ] on 17 november 2023, the slm-minnawi and the justice and equality movement (jem) accused the chadian government of supporting the rsf, and "supplying it with military equipment and mercenaries by opening its territory and airspace". [ 332 ] a report from africa analyst alleged that chadian soldiers belonging to a joint chadian-sudanese command under osman bahr intercepted a shipment of military equipment intended for the rsf on its way from n'djamena and gave it instead to the jem, which the latter denied. [ 333 ] the economist linked chad's junta receiving financial support from the uae in exchange for allowing it to support the rsf through amdjarass airport. [ 334 ] [ 335 ] following accusations by saf deputy commander yasser al-atta of chadian government support for the rsf, the chadian government unsuccessfully demanded an apology from the sudanese ambassador and expelled four sudanese diplomats from the country on 17 december. [ 336 ] on 5 november 2024, the government of sudan filed a complaint with the african commission on human and peoples' rights demanding reparations from chad for their support of the rsf, accusing chad of violating international law. [ 337 ] on 9 january 2025 china donated emergency food aid (1,250 tonnes) to be allocated to all states. [ 338 ] amnesty international's 2024 report highlighted china as a supplier of weapons fueling the conflict, breaching the darfur arms embargo. recently-manufactured chinese arms have been traced to both the saf and the rsf, although china's official stance avoids acknowledging direct support to either faction. [ 339 ] china initially adhered to non-interference, evacuating citizens and calling for peace without taking sides. this mirrored its approach in past conflicts, prioritizing stability to protect economic interests. [ 340 ] china's sudan strategy ties into the belt and road initiative , aiming to secure red sea trade routes and infrastructure links. the civil war delayed these ambitions, reinforcing china's preference for a stable, cooperative government in khartoum. unlike russia, which has militarily backed the rsf, or the us, which pursues sanctions and mediation, china prioritizes economic continuity over ideological alignment. [ 341 ] on 15 april, rsf forces claimed, via twitter, to have taken egyptian troops prisoner near merowe , [ 342 ] [ 343 ] and a military plane carrying markings of the egyptian air force . [ 344 ] initially, no official explanation was given for the egyptian soldiers' presence, while egypt and sudan have had military cooperation due to diplomatic tensions with ethiopia . [ 345 ] later on, the egyptian armed forces stated that around 200 of its soldiers were in sudan to conduct exercises with the sudanese military. [ 84 ] around that time, the saf reportedly encircled rsf forces in merowe airbase. as a result, the egyptian armed forces announced that it was following the situation as a precaution for the safety of its personnel. [ 91 ] the rsf later stated that it would cooperate in repatriating the soldiers to egypt. [ 344 ] on 19 april, the rsf stated that it had moved the soldiers to khartoum and would hand them over when the "appropriate opportunity" arose. [ 346 ] of the captured egyptian troops, 177 were released and flown back to egypt aboard three egyptian military planes that took off from khartoum airport later in the day. the remaining 27 soldiers, who were from the egyptian air force, were sheltered at the egyptian embassy and later evacuated. [ 347 ] [ 348 ] on 16 april 2023, the rsf claimed that its troops in port sudan were attacked by foreign aircraft and issued a warning against any foreign interference. [ 349 ] according to former cia analyst cameron hudson, egyptian fighter jets were a part of these bombing campaigns against the rsf, and egyptian special forces units have been deployed and are providing intelligence and tactical support to the saf. [ 350 ] the wall street journal said that egypt had sent fighter jets and pilots to support the sudanese military. [ 351 ] on 17 april, satellite imagery obtained by the war zone revealed that one egyptian air force mig-29m2 fighter jet had been destroyed and two others had been damaged or destroyed at merowe airbase . a sudanese air force guizhou jl-9 was among the destroyed aircraft. [ 352 ] after initial confusion, the rsf accepted the explanation that egyptian combat and support personnel were conducting exercises with the sudanese military before the outbreak of hostilities. [ 84 ] eritrea is seen as an ally of the saf, providing military support in sudan's eastern borders. during a state visit to asmara in november 2024, al-burhan thanked president isaias afwerki for eritrea's support to the saf. eritrea's support is seen as a counterbalance to eritrean opposition groups and their possibility of growing in influence under the advance of the rsf in sudan's eastern border. president afwerki has implied eritrea's military readiness to respond in the case of an rsf advance to its borders. [ 353 ] [ 354 ] ethiopia initially supported the rsf, which was seen as an ally who helped ethiopia fight against the tigray people's liberation front in the tigray war . [ 9 ] ethiopia was also supportive of the rsf to counter egyptian influence in sudan. [ 355 ] however, in july 2024, primer minister abiy ahmed visited port sudan and met with al-burhan, signaling a shifting position on the conflict. [ 355 ] rsf's hemedti had previously paid a visit to ethiopia in december 2023 to push for talks with the saf. [ 356 ] a june 2024 bbc investigation revealed that iran violated the un arms embargo by supplying drones to both sides. [ 357 ] analysts see this move as part of iran's strategy to counter uae influence in sudan and secure access to the red sea. [ 358 ] [ 359 ] although sudanese officials denied receiving iranian aid, [ 358 ] multiple sources—including reuters—confirmed its impact on the battlefield. [ 360 ] the saf rejected kenya's mediation role in july 2023, accusing president william ruto of having ties to rsf leader hemedti and offering refuge to rsf members. [ 361 ] [ 362 ] saf lt. gen. yasir alatta escalated tensions by calling ruto a mercenary and challenging him to deploy troops. [ 363 ] sudan later threatened to quit igad unless ruto was removed as head of its mediation committee. [ 364 ] kenya denied the accusations, calling them baseless and reaffirming its neutrality. [ 365 ] [ 366 ] in retaliation, anonymous sudan attacked kenyan websites in late july. [ 367 ] tensions deepened in february 2025 when kenya hosted a meeting in nairobi where the rsf and its allies signed a charter to form a parallel sudanese government without the saf's participation. sudan condemned the move, accusing kenya of undermining its sovereignty. analysts noted a shift in kenya's stance following ruto's january 2025 uae visit and economic agreement, suggesting a possible emirati influence behind kenya's actions. [ 368 ] [ 369 ] the egypt-backed libyan national army , under the command of khalifa haftar , dispatched aircraft to fly military supplies to the rsf before the outbreak of hostilities. [ 370 ] [ 351 ] haftar and the lna collaborated with the wagner group , a russian private military company , to conduct these flights. [ 370 ] haftar's support for a different faction in sudan than the egyptian government was commented on by the new arab , which viewed it as a sign of egyptian weakness due to economic malaise and reliance on haftar to police eastern libya, which constitutes a security concern for the egyptian government. the new arab also viewed the lna's role in the conflict as signifying a shift in its diplomatic orientation, from being primarily backed by egypt to being primarily backed by the united arab emirates . [ 371 ] for much of the sudanese civil war russia has sent weapons to both the rsf and saf. this began to shift during mid-2024, with the russian government beginning to favour the saf, concurrent with russia–saf discussions around the construction of a russian naval base north of port sudan. [ 372 ] [ 373 ] according to cnn , wagner supplied surface-to-air missiles to the rsf, picking up the items from syria and delivering some of them by plane to haftar-controlled bases in libya to be then delivered to the rsf, while dropping other items directly to rsf positions in northwestern sudan. [ 374 ] american officials said that wagner was offering to supply additional weapons to the rsf from its existing stocks in the central african republic . [ 375 ] on 6 september, wagner reportedly deployed a convoy of more than 100 vehicles carrying weapons to the rsf garrison in al-zurug from chad. [ 376 ] saf lieutenant general yasser al-atta also accused the wagner group of bringing in mercenaries from several african nations to fight alongside the rsf. [ 377 ] the head of the wagner group, yevgeny prigozhin , [ 378 ] and the rsf denied the allegations. [ 379 ] as relations between the russian government and the saf improved during mid-2024, the latter publicly claimed that the wagner group was no longer operating in sudan. this claim was contradicted by a diplomatic source and eyewitnesses speaking to middle east eye . [ 372 ] saudi arabia has provided military support and financial aid (though it officially denies it) [ 380 ] to the saf, as it seeks to counterbalance the uae's influence in sudan, which supports the rsf. [ 381 ] in response, sudan has provided military support for the saudi coalition in yemen. [ 381 ] in march 2025, al-burhan visited saudi arabia in his first trip outside sudan since the saf retook khartoum . there, he thanked saudi support for sudanese unity and the fight against the rsf. [ 382 ] since the outbreak of renewed violence in sudan in 2023, south sudan has adopted a mediatory role, urging peace and engaging with igad and the au, though with limited success due to the conflict's complexity and multiple factions. south sudan is deeply concerned about spillover effects—such as refugee flows and economic instability—and recognizes that its own fragile stability is tied to sudan's fate. [ 383 ] [ 384 ] tensions escalated further with a february 2025 alliance between sudan's rsf and the splm-n , a rebel group near the south sudanese border. experts warn this could pull south sudan into the conflict, especially if the sudanese army supports rival south sudanese militias in response. with shared borders, historical ties, and existing political tensions between south sudan's leaders (president salva kiir mayardit and vice president riek machar ), the risk of both wars merging is high. the strategic location of the rsf-splm-n alliance also boosts smuggling and military operations, weakening sudan's army and increasing regional instability. if unchecked, experts fear the two conflicts could become indistinguishable, worsening humanitarian crises in both countries. [ 385 ] [ 386 ] turkey appears to be engaging with both sides, notably through baykar , owned by president recep tayyip erdoğan 's son-in-law, selling $120 million worth of weapons, 6 tb2 ucav 's , 3 ground control stations, 600 warheads to the saf in 2023, violating us and eu sanctions. [ 387 ] [ 388 ] meanwhile, arca defense, another turkish company, had extensive contact with rsf's procurement officer, though it denies selling weapons, adding complexity to turkey's role. [ 389 ] turkey's interests include expanding military and diplomatic ties in the horn of africa, offering to mediate between sudan and the uae in december 2024. [ 390 ] in january 2025, the somali government agreed to host saf troops at camp turksom for training, as part of a turkish-led effort to bolster military support to the saf. [ 391 ] [ 392 ] on 19 september 2023, cnn reported that it was "likely" that ukrainian special forces were behind a series of drone strikes and a ground operation directed against the wagner group-backed rsf near khartoum on 8 september. [ 376 ] kyrylo budanov , the chief of the ukrainian main directorate of intelligence , stated in an interview on 22 september that he could neither confirm or deny ukraine's involvement in the conflict, [ 393 ] but said that ukraine "will be seeking and hunting down russian military criminals ... sooner or later". [ 394 ] on 6 november 2023, the kyiv post released drone footage of what it claimed was ukrainian special forces attacking wagner group personnel in an unidentified urban area in sudan with an explosive projectile, which was believed to have been taken about two weeks before its publication. [ 395 ] two months later on 30 january 2024, the kyiv post reported that ukrainian special forces had launched three drone strikes targeting the wagner group and other russian organisations in sudan as well as their sudanese partners in the preceding weeks. [ 396 ] the kyiv post released a report on 5 february 2024 with a video showing the aftermath of an attack allegedly by ukrainian special forces on a wagner group unit which had purportedly suffered several deaths and the capture of at least one member of the unit who was seen being interrogated on camera. [ 397 ] the uae has faced mounting accusations of providing military support to rsf, [ 377 ] [ 398 ] including covert arms transfers, drone supply, and logistics routed through chad, libya, car, [ 399 ] and south sudan. [ 400 ] [ 401 ] reports by major outlets like the wall street journal , [ 402 ] new york times , [ 334 ] and bbc , [ 357 ] along with diplomatic sources and satellite evidence, suggest emirati cargo planes delivered weapons disguised as aid, with operations coordinated through amdjarass airport in chad. [ 403 ] despite uae denials, [ 404 ] [ 405 ] [ 406 ] sudan expelled emirati diplomats, [ 407 ] accused the uae at the un of aiding genocide, [ 408 ] [ 409 ] and submitted complaints to the international criminal court and the international court of justice . [ 410 ] [ 411 ] the uae is alleged to be using humanitarian cover (e.g., red crescent hospitals) for military purposes, including drone operations and weapon bunkers near the border. [ 412 ] [ 413 ] [ 414 ] sudan claims these actions aim to maintain emirati influence and gold interests in sudan, backed by historical investments and ongoing port and agriculture projects. [ 415 ] [ 416 ] [ 417 ] the uae's ties to the rsf date back to the yemen war in 2018. its involvement is said to include cooperation with wagner group for arms deliveries and financing rsf logistics from within the emirates. [ 418 ] [ 419 ] identity documents recovered from a 2024 plane crash in sudan included a russian passport and an id that linked to a uae-based company. [ 420 ] [ 421 ] the u.s. and uk have called on the uae to halt support, [ 422 ] [ 423 ] with u.s. lawmakers introducing multiple bills to block arms sales to abu dhabi. [ 424 ] [ 425 ] the eu [ 426 ] [ 427 ] [ 428 ] and human rights watch [ 429 ] also demanded accountability. however, emirati diplomatic efforts continue, such as hosting a humanitarian conference and pledging aid—moves sudan sees as attempts to sanitize its image. [ 430 ] [ 431 ] the international court of justice began hearings on 10 april 2025 on sudan's genocide case against the uae. [ 432 ] in june 2024, the guardian reported that according to multiple sources, uk government officials "attempted to suppress criticism" of the united arab emirates and its alleged role in supplying arms to the rsf. [ 433 ] furthermore, the uk is the un security council's " penholder " [ 434 ] for sudan. [ 433 ] in early 2023, the foreign, commonwealth and development office initiated secret talks between the rsf and the uk. [ 435 ] sudan's deputy chairman of the sovereign council malik agar criticized the british government during a december 2024 meeting with the head of the uk office for sudan. agar said that "if britain wants to end the suffering of the sudanese people, it must communicate with the uae to stop the logistical support it provides to the militia". agar also denounced the uk's penholder status for sudan on the united nations security council, and demanded a change in the uk's foreign policy towards sudan as a prerequisite for improving bilateral ties. [ 436 ] on 20 january 2025, the trump administration froze usaid payments for 90 days, redirecting most funds to military aid. [ 437 ] [ 438 ] this resulted in the closure of hundreds of soup kitchens, and increased deaths from starvation. [ 439 ] a court ordered the freeze lifted on 13 february, but the administration cancelled nearly 10,000 aid contracts instead. the judge later demanded payments by 26 february, but chief justice john g. roberts paused the order pending a supreme court ruling by 28 february. [ 440 ] the humanitarian crisis following the fighting was further exacerbated by the violence occurring during a period of high temperatures, and drought starting during the fasting month of ramadan . civilians were unable to venture outside of their homes to obtain food and supplies for fear of getting caught in the crossfire. a doctors' group said that hospitals remained understaffed and were running low on supplies as wounded people streamed in. [ 441 ] the world health organization (who) recorded around 26 attacks on healthcare facilities, some of which resulted in casualties among medical workers and civilians. [ 442 ] the who said 80% of hospitals in conflict areas were out of service [ 443 ] with 32 forcibly evacuated by soldiers or caught in the crossfire. [ 444 ] this included about half of khartoum's 130 medical facilities and all hospitals in west darfur. [ 445 ] outbreaks of diseases such as measles , cholera and diarrhea were reported across the country. [ 446 ] in august 2024 cholera was declared an epidemic in the country and as of 8 september 2024 [update] , there were 5,692 cases of cholera including 185 deaths. [ 447 ] in april 2023, the united nations reported that shortages of basic goods, such as food, water, medicines and fuel have become "extremely acute". [ 448 ] the delivery of badly-needed remittances from overseas migrant workers was also halted after western union announced in the same month that it was closing all operations in sudan until further notice. [ 449 ] the world food programme said that more than $13 million worth of food aid destined for sudan had been looted in the twenty days since the fighting broke out. [ 450 ] the looting of the wfp's warehouses in el-obeid on 1 june led to the loss of food aid meant to feed 4.4 million people. [ 451 ] an estimated 25 million people, equivalent to more than half of sudan's population, were said to be in need of aid in june 2023. [ 452 ] on 25 july, humanitarian coordinator clementine nkweta-salami said attacks on humanitarian facilities had led to more than 50 warehouses looted, 82 offices ransacked, and over 200 vehicles stolen. [ 453 ] in september 2023, the un office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs said that 1,200 children had died from disease outbreaks in refugee camps in white nile state since may. [ 454 ] in central darfur , the head of the hamidiya refugee camp said at least 43 children had died in the camp since july. [ 455 ] unicef also estimated that the conflict had led to the number of children being out of school in sudan to rise from seven million prior to the fighting to 19 million in october 2023. [ 456 ] by 2024, the war's economic costs had surpassed all prior armed conflicts since sudanese independence in 1956 due to extensive destruction of infrastructure, particularly in urban areas such as the capital city of khartoum . [ 457 ] the dramatic decrease in agricultural activity ("cereal production in 2023 was nearly halved") caused increases in food prices, and the conflict led to infrequent aid convoys. according to an army official cited by al jazeera, as of 29 march 2024, "70 aid trucks have been stuck in north kordofan since october". the un estimated that 25 million people still needed aid, with 5 million facing famine and 18 million enduring "acute food insecurity". mobile networks being cut for nearly two months compounded the problems for those being helped by remittances from relatives abroad. [ 458 ] according to the united nations, both the saf and rsf are posing obstacles to food aid because they want to prevent food from getting to areas controlled by the other. [ 458 ] in june 2024, amnesty international's report, "new weapons fuelling the sudan conflict", stated that the constant flow of foreign weapons is fueling the war and breaching the darfur arms embargo. the organization found that the recently manufactured or transferred weapons and ammunition were being imported in large quantities into sudan from china, the uae, russia and turkey. the weapons supply has impacted the war by causing massive civilian displacement and a humanitarian crisis in sudan. both warring sides were using chinese-manufactured advanced drone jammers, mortars and anti-material rifles. the rsf was also reported to be using recently manufactured armoured personnel carriers from the uae. [ 330 ] on 1 august 2024, the integrated food security phase classification (ipc) famine review committee (frc) concluded that ipc phase 5 famine conditions are prevalent and ongoing in parts of north darfur, including the zamzam camp south of el fashe and that there was a high risk of similar conditions throughout internally displaced persons (idp) camps. [ 49 ] [ 459 ] in late january 2025, the new administration of us president donald trump froze foreign aid for 90 days with waivers supposed to be available for urgent and life-saving aid. however, the waiver process has been slow to get rolling. [ 460 ] by february 2025, famine had taken hold in at least five regions, with over 600,000 people at risk of starvation. the world food programme reported that 80% of emergency food kitchens had shut down due to u.s. aid cuts. in north darfur , msf and wfp suspended operations at zamzam camp, which houses around 500,000 people. cholera outbreaks have surged due to the collapse of sudan's healthcare infrastructure. [ 437 ] [ 461 ] [ 438 ] [ 462 ] as of february 2025, over 12.3 million residents of sudan have been displaced due to the fighting. the united nations said that the conflict had produced more than 8.8 million internally displaced persons (idps), while more than 3.5 million had fled the country. [ 35 ] this makes sudan the largest host of idps globally. [ 463 ] the international organization for migration estimated that 31% of idps originated from khartoum state, followed by 18% from south darfur state and 15% from north darfur state. [ 35 ] in november 2023, the un said the conflict created the largest child displacement crisis in the world. [ 464 ] 53% of people who have been internally displaced due to the conflict are children. [ 35 ] of those who fled abroad, more than 160,000 were masalit who fled to chad to escape ethnically based attacks by the rsf and allied militias. [ 465 ] fighting between the saf and the splm-n (al-hilu) reportedly displaced more than 35,000 people in blue nile state alone, with 3,000 fleeing to ethiopia, [ 77 ] while more than 83,000 were displaced in south kordofan. [ 466 ] as of august, more than 400,000 people had fled to chad, making it the largest single destination of refugees from the conflict, while others fled to other neighboring countries such as the central african republic, egypt, and south sudan. [ 467 ] criticism was levelled at diplomatic missions operating in sudan for their slow response in helping sudanese visa applicants whose passports were left behind in embassies following their closure during evacuation efforts, preventing them from leaving the country. [ 468 ] the un estimated that economic activity in sudan fell by more than a third during the first three weeks of the conflict. [ 469 ] in july, sudanese economists estimated the total amount of damage brought by the conflict at $9 billion, or an average of $100 million per day, while the value of property and goods looted was estimated at another $40 billion, with the most affected areas being khartoum and south darfur. [ 470 ] the exchange rate of the us dollar against the sudanese pound in the black market rose to sdg730 in september, while it reached sdg625 at the official rate. this later reached sdg1250 in february 2024. the formal economy was described as being in a "near standstill". [ 471 ] [ 469 ] gold production was also reduced to just 2 tons from the previous year's output of 18 tons. [ 472 ] sudanese minister for minerals mohamed bashir abu nammu accused the rsf of looting around 15 tons of silver and 1,273 kilograms of gold from the sudan gold refinery at the start of the conflict. [ 473 ] in february 2024, finance minister gibril ibrahim said that the sudanese economy had contracted by 40 per cent in 2023 due to the fighting, with an additional decline of 28 per cent expected in 2024. he added that state revenues had also decreased by 80 per cent. [ 474 ] sudanese port authorities estimated that international trade had fallen by 23 per cent in 2023. the sudanese finance ministry was unable to set a national budget for 2023 or 2024 and stopped issuing quarterly reports. it also raised the exchange rate for imports and exports from sdg650 to sdg950. the fighting also rendered more than 60 per cent of sudan's agricultural land out of service, according to fikra for studies and development. [ 471 ] in may 2024, the wall street journal reported that both the rsf and saf were using revenue from the sale of gum arabic , which is primarily grown in sudan, to finance their operations. [ 475 ] the suspension of usaid funding in 2025 significantly reduced cash assistance, which grassroots emergency response groups relied on to sustain food kitchens. the crisis also impacted neighboring countries, with over two million sudanese refugees facing deteriorating conditions. [ 437 ] [ 461 ] throughout the sudan conflict, both the saf and rsf waged aggressive disinformation campaigns, using social media to manipulate public opinion, spread false narratives, and bolster their own images. [ 476 ] [ 477 ] the rsf ran digital propaganda teams from khartoum and dubai, using verified social media accounts to distribute misleading content. [ 478 ] the saf used twitter for morale-boosting and to counter rsf claims, though some of its posts were proven false. [ 479 ] [ 480 ] widespread disinformation included recycled footage from video games, past conflicts like ukraine and libya, and even archaeological props misrepresented as war crimes. [ 481 ] for instance, saf posted a video allegedly showing recent air operations, which was actually from the video game arma 3 . [ 482 ] the saf also circulated altered images, including a fabricated photo of hemedti hospitalized in nairobi. [ 483 ] [ 484 ] the rsf shared footage of a saf and egyptian air force warplane reportedly shot down by the rsf found to be that of an su-25 fighter jet that crashed in mali , [ 485 ] and the other of a libyan aircraft taken outside sudan in 2020. [ 486 ] the rsf also sent bulletins to uk politicians with the help of dubai-based capital tap holdings, aiming to counter what it called "disproportionate" disinformation. [ 487 ] facebook removed rsf pages in august 2024, citing policy violations. the rsf blamed saf for instigating the ban and said it was negotiating with meta to restore its accounts. [ 488 ] the conflict's information space has been further destabilized by false claims against organizations like the sudanese doctors syndicate [ 489 ] and by deepfake-like imagery. disinformation experts, including kyle walter of logically, warned that generative ai may be fueling the sophistication of fake content, undermining trust in all sources of information. [ 487 ] in response to ceasefire violations and human rights abuses in sudan, u.s. president joe biden issued an executive order on 4 may 2023 authorizing sanctions against actors destabilizing the country. [ 490 ] the first sanctions followed in june, targeting companies linked to both the saf and rsf, along with visa restrictions on unnamed individuals. [ 491 ] subsequent rounds of sanctions included rsf leaders abdelrahim dagalo and abdel rahman jumma (accused of killing west darfur's governor), islamist leader ali karti , [ 492 ] firms in sudan and russia, and former bashir regime officials involved in rsf support or coup plots. [ 493 ] in may 2024, more rsf commanders were sanctioned for violence in north and central darfur. [ 494 ] [ 495 ] facing growing pressure from u.s. lawmakers, the biden administration considered declaring rsf atrocities as genocide and tightening sanctions—especially due to the uae's alleged role in smuggling sudanese gold to fund the rsf. [ 496 ] [ 497 ] [ 498 ] on 7 january 2025, the u.s. officially labeled rsf actions as genocide and imposed sanctions on hemedti, seven rsf-linked companies, and uae-based capital tab holding llc. however, critics said the measures came too late and would have limited impact. [ 499 ] [ 500 ] in response, the uae began lobbying in washington to avoid direct sanctions. [ 501 ] on 12 july 2023, the united kingdom announced sanctions on firms linked to the saf and the rsf for providing funds and weapons in the conflict. [ 502 ] on 15 april 2024, canada imposed sanctions on two individuals and four entities linked to the saf and the rsf. [ 503 ] on 23 june 2024, the european union imposed sanctions on six entities for manufacturing and procuring weapons for the saf and the rsf. [ 504 ] on 6 march 2025, canada imposed sanctions on al-burhan and hemedti, due to "an unwillingness on the part of the leaders to negotiate an end to the war". [ 505 ]

the following is a timeline of the sudanese civil war (2023–present) in 2025 . this timeline is a dynamic and fluid list, and as such may never satisfy criteria of completeness. moreover, some events may only be fully understood and/or discovered in retrospect. the joint darfur force (jdf) said it had killed 462 rapid support forces (rsf) fighters including six commanders in a failed attack on al-malha, north darfur . in addition, three vehicles were destroyed. the remaining unit under ali rizqallah al-safana retreated. the jdf also called on the rsf to surrender to the jdf or the sudanese armed forces (saf). [ 1 ] the saf claimed that rsf brigadier general ibrahim delib was killed along with 32 rsf fighters, including a mauritanian national, after a drone being launched by the group misfired in el fasher . [ 2 ] two people were killed by rsf shelling on the saudi hospital in el fasher. [ 3 ] four others were killed by rsf shelling in omdurman . [ 4 ] ten people were killed in an saf airstrike in khartoum . [ 5 ] the saf and the jdf claimed to have deflected an rsf assault on el fasher that came from the east and southeast of the city. the jdf also intercepted a weapons convoy for the rsf, arresting both sudanese and libyan nationals. [ 6 ] the united states officially declared that the rsf had committed genocide and imposed sanctions on hemedti . [ 7 ] the saf retook the administrative center of ombadda as well as al-shagla and the western section of the al-fitaihab neighborhood of omdurman from the rsf. it also claimed to have freed three captive officers in al-fitaihab in a special operation that left more than 20 rsf militants dead, including a commander. [ 8 ] four people were killed in an saf airstrike on the fata borno idp camp in kutum , north darfur. [ 9 ] the saf retook the town of haj abdallah in gezira state , 58 kilometers from wad madani , and the village of mahalla, 13 kilometers from wad madani, from the rsf. [ 10 ] the saf retook the town of al-shabarqa in gezira state, 13 kilometers east of wad madani, from the rsf. [ 11 ] the saf retook the town of um al-qura in gezira state, 40 kilometers east of wad madani, from the rsf, while the saf-allied sudan shield forces retook wad al-abyad, 20 kilometres from the hantoub bridge. [ 12 ] at least 26 people were killed in an attack by the sudan shield forces on the village of tayba in gezira state. [ 13 ] the saf retook wad madani , the capital of gezira state . [ 14 ] sixteen people were killed by rsf shelling on the zamzam idp camp in north darfur. [ 15 ] the saf retook the al-rawad residential complex in khartoum from the rsf. [ 16 ] at least 120 people were killed by shelling in western omdurman. [ 17 ] the merowe dam power station was damaged by rsf drones, causing a fire at the facility and power outages as far as shendi , port sudan , atbara and omdurman. [ 18 ] the saf retook karkaraia and hajar al-jawad, on the road between dalang and kadugli in south kordofan , from the splm-n (al-hilu) . [ 19 ] thirteen people were killed by the saf and allied militias in an attack on the informal settlement of kambo tayba in gezira state. [ 20 ] the jdf claimed to have killed hundreds of rsf militants, destroyed 262 vehicles, and captured 21 militants and 67 vehicles during clashes in al-malha and halaf in north darfur. [ 21 ] at least 18 people were killed in attacks by the sudan shield forces on the shukaba camp and camp 16 in gezira state. [ 22 ] at least 120 people were killed in an rsf attack on a civilian convoy being escorted by the sudan liberation movement (slm) and the gathering of sudan liberation forces (gslf) near kabkabiya , north darfur. [ 23 ] nine people were killed in attacks by the saf and the rsf on members of the kanabi community, who mostly originate from darfur , in abu gouta, gezira state. [ 24 ] fifteen people were killed in an rsf attack on the village of al-khizan in abu gouta. [ 25 ] the sultan ali dinar palace museum in el fasher was shelled by the rsf, causing a fire that heavily damaged the structure and destroyed its contents and furniture. [ 26 ] senior us officials reported that the saf had recently used chemical weapons against the rsf in rural areas at least twice. [ 27 ] the us also sanctioned saf chief general abdel fattah al-burhan for the army's conduct in the war. [ 28 ] the rsf said that it attacked fighters and vehicles in kabkabiya belonging to the jdf between the slm-al nur and the gslf. the rsf called for a joint committee to investigate the incident. [ 29 ] forty people were killed in an rsf attack on the village of jebel hilla in north darfur. [ 30 ] six drones struck the al-shawak power station in gedaref state , injuring civil defence personnel and causing blackouts across the state and in kassala state . other drones hit the gedaref state water station while another crashed near a bus station along the gedaref - kassala -port sudan highway. [ 31 ] the saf reached the al-shukri junction in shambat, khartoum bahri , while the rsf retreated by one kilometer southwards to the hassan ibrahim malik university city. [ 32 ] at least three people were killed by rsf shelling in omdurman. [ 33 ] the rsf claimed to have taken al-hallaf, drishaqi and mao in north darfur. [ 34 ] at least 11 people were killed by rsf shelling on the abu shouk idp camp in el fasher. [ 35 ] a coalition of saf and allied forces claimed to have repelled two rsf incursions from libya in north darfur near the tri-border area with chad and libya, killing a total of over 950 fighters, destroying 61 vehicles, and capturing 78 others that were equipped with advanced weaponry. [ 36 ] the sudanese revolutionary front expelled the united popular front from its member groups after the upf accused the alliance of being unduly influenced by the rsf. [ 37 ] saf units besieged at the signal corps garrison in khartoum bahri launched their first major offensive since september 2024, forcing the rsf to withdraw east towards the kafouri neighborhood. the saf also retook abboud park in khartoum bahri and the juwayriyah school and the african council schools in al safiya district. [ 38 ] the rsf issued a 48-hour ultimatum for the saf to withdraw from el fasher. [ 39 ] the saf launched an offensive towards the el-jeili oil refinery and retook the rotana mills southeast of the facility. [ 40 ] the el-jeili oil refinery caught fire with smoke being seen from omdurman and khartoum bahri. the saf claimed that the rsf had set fire to the facility, while the rsf claimed that it caught fire due to incendiary barrel bombs dropped by the sudanese air force . [ 41 ] two people were killed by rsf shelling on the abu shouk idp camp. [ 42 ] an indefinite strike was launched by employees of the bashair hospital in khartoum after an rsf member opened fire inside the facility the previous day. [ 43 ] at least 70 people were killed in an rsf drone strike on the maternity ward of the saudi hospital in el fasher that also destroyed its emergency department. [ 44 ] [ 45 ] the saf claimed to have broken the siege around the signal corp's base in khartoum. the rsf denied the claims. [ 46 ] the saf also claimed to have broken the siege around its general headquarters in khartoum and retook the el-jeili oil refinery. [ 47 ] the saf and allied militias repelled an rsf attack on el fasher following the expiration of the latter's ultimatum for the saf to withdraw. the jdf claimed it had killed more than 400 rsf militants, destroyed more than 25 vehicles and captured 30 others. [ 48 ] ayub osman nahar resigned as an advisor to hemedti, saying that he refused to be part of the rsf's atrocities against civilians and accusing the group of burning villages and killing civilians in north darfur and gezira state. [ 49 ] the saf claimed to have pushed into parts of eastern khartoum near the al-rabat college in burri district, advanced through large portions of the al-azba, kafouri , ad babaker, and ramallah neighborhoods of khartoun north, and continued their advances towards the el mek nimr bridge . they also claimed to have deployed troops to hold several neighborhoods under their control. [ 50 ] more than 100 people were killed in an rsf attack on the village of broush in north darfur. [ 51 ] the saf claimed to have seized the rsf's medical directorate located in the former saf paratroopers base in shambat, as well as the blue and bashir towers in khartoum bahri. [ 52 ] the rsf announced the death in action of one of its senior commanders, rahmtalla al-mahdi, also known as "jalha", along with his brother. the two were reportedly killed in an airstrike east of khartoum. [ 53 ] the saf made further gains in khartoum bahri and advanced towards the el mek nimr bridge, forcing the rsf out of almost the entire city except in hillet hamad. [ 54 ] renewed fighting in el fasher killed seven people and injured 12 others. the saf claimed that the deaths were caused by rsf shelling on the abu shouk camp. the saf also claimed to have repelled an rsf attack on the city. [ 55 ] the saf retook the city of umm ruwaba in north kordofan , advancing towards el obeid . [ 56 ] it shot down ten drones over el obeid [ 57 ] and retook al-azba and the eastern part of the kafouri neighbourhood of khartoum bahri. [ 58 ] at least 60 people were killed while 250 others were injured in an rsf attack on the sabreen market in omdurman. [ 59 ] two others were killed in an saf airstrike in khartoum, [ 60 ] while at least seven were killed by rsf shelling in el obeid. [ 61 ] eleven people were killed by rsf shelling on the abu shouk camp, while 13 others were killed during clashes in nyala . [ 62 ] the saf claimed to have retaken the cities of tambul , rufaa and al-hasahisa in gezira state. [ 63 ] the jdf claimed to have repelled an rsf attack on el fasher, killing 140 fighters and mercenaries, destroying 43 vehicles and capturing 12 more. the jdf also said that rsf fighters were appearing more on foot and on camels and horses, and also appeared to be under the influence of drugs. [ 64 ] the saf retook wad rawah and al-nabati in gezira state. [ 65 ] renewed fighting and airstrikes in darfur left at least 248 people dead or wounded. health authorities believe the death toll is much higher than recorded due to the ongoing fighting preventing bodies from being recovered and counted. [ 62 ] abdallah hussein, a senior rsf commander was killed by an saf airstrike in al-kamelin in gezira state. [ 66 ] the saf claimed to have broke the siege of its corps of engineers garrison in the al 'aylafun area, and retook the al-asaylat, um daw ban, and al 'aylafun areas of the east nile locality. the saf said it plans to continue advances to recapture the soba bridge. [ 67 ] according to the state health minister of south kordofan, the splm-n (al-hilu) killed 44 people after shelling the main market, residential neighborhoods, and temporary shelters in schools in kadugli. [ 68 ] twenty-five people were killed in an saf airstrike in nyala. [ 69 ] at least six people were killed by rsf shelling on the al-nao hospital in omdurman. [ 70 ] the saf claimed to have retaken al-kamelin [ 71 ] and laid siege to the town of naima in white nile state. [ 72 ] engineers from the khartoum state water authority were fired at by rsf snipers stationed at the kuwaiti building while they were assessing the damage to the bahri water plant. [ 73 ] the saf claimed to have retaken the al-rumaila district of khartoum as well as the central mint. [ 74 ] five people were killed in saf airstrikes in nyala. [ 75 ] the saf claimed to have retaken the el tekeina, el maseed and el noba areas south of giad , the saria industrial complex near abu hamama in khartoum, and wadi el akhdar in the sharg el nil area of khartoum bahri. [ 76 ] the saf claimed to have retaken the traffic signs and license plates factory along with the entire industrial area of khartoum. they also claimed to have retaken al-masoudiya in khartoum state [ 77 ] and abu quta in northwestern gezira state. [ 78 ] the saf claimed to have shot down seven rsf drones over debba , northern state . [ 79 ] three people were killed in an rsf attack on the zamzam idp camp. [ 80 ] five others were killed in an rsf attack on saloma, southeast of el fasher. [ 81 ] the saf claimed to have retaken the kafouri district of khartoum bahri. [ 82 ] the slm and the gslf launched an incursion into chad from darfur, resulting in clashes with the chadian army in the vicinity of the tri-border area with sudan and libya. six sudanese soldiers were killed while 13 others were injured. three vehicles were also destroyed while two sudanese commanders were captured and detained at amdjarass . [ 83 ] the transitional sovereignty council announced that a civilian-led transitional government would be formed once the saf takes full control of khartoum. [ 84 ] [ 85 ] at least 31 people were killed following two days of rsf attacks on the zamzam idp camp. [ 86 ] at least 30 people were reported killed in rsf attacks on al-jamalab and na'ima in white nile state. fifteen others drowned on the white nile river while they were boarding a boat to escape the attacks. [ 87 ] a 100-member rsf unit stationed in al-muzmum, sennar state , surrendered to the saf in singa after previously fleeing to south sudan. [ 88 ] the saf claimed to have retaken the el nour islamic complex and the bahri thermal power plant in khartoum. [ 89 ] ten people were killed in rsf attacks in mellit station in el fasher. the saf claimed to have destroyed an rsf base in the east of the city. [ 90 ] the saf took control of the kafouri area, the last rsf stronghold in khartoum north , and the city of er rahad in north kordofan . [ 91 ] it also retook the ministry of animal resources, the tax tower, the malaysian tower, and the medical supply department headquarters near central khartoum. [ 92 ] the sudanese government extended the opening of the adre border crossing with chad until 16 may to allow humanitarian aid to reach darfur. [ 93 ] the saf retook the kober bridge connecting khartoum with khartoum bahri, as well as large parts of el sajana and el hilla el jadeeda in southeastern khartoum. [ 94 ] the rsf announced plans to form a parallel government in exile , the government of peace and unity , in nairobi , kenya . [ 95 ] more than 200 people were killed following three days of rsf attacks in the el geteina area of white nile state. [ 96 ] an rsf assault on the zamzam camp forced thousands to flee to tawila . [ 97 ] six people were killed by rsf shelling in omdurman. [ 98 ] the saf claimed to have retaken the el hurriya bridge in central khartoum, as well as sidra in north kordofan. [ 99 ] the united nations confirmed a state of famine in the zamzam, abu shouk and al salam idp camps in north darfur, as well as in two locations in the western nuba mountains . [ 100 ] ten people were killed in an airstrike in el khazan jadeed, east darfur . [ 99 ] the sudanese government recalled its ambassador to kenya over the latter's hosting of meetings by the rsf and allied groups. [ 101 ] it also imposed a ban on the saudi-owned asharq news news channel, which was lifted on 24 march. [ 102 ] the saf and the sudan shield forces claimed to have forced the rsf to retreat from the soba neighbourhood of eastern khartoum and retook the al-lulua and al-samra neighbourhoods southeast of the soba bridge connecting khartoum’s southern and eastern neighbourhoods with the rural areas of east nile, adding that the 17 rsf militants were killed while nine vehicles were destroyed or captured. [ 103 ] the rsf, the splm-n (al-hilu) and allied groups signed a charter to establish the government of peace and unity following a meeting in nairobi. [ 104 ] [ 105 ] the saf’s sayyad force lifted the two-year siege of el obeid . [ 106 ] the saf also recaptured el geteina. [ 107 ] the saf claimed to have taken the eastern part of the soba bridge. [ 108 ] the saf said that it had partially broken the siege of dalang and captured the al-karkal, koli, and kiqa regions north of kadugli and hajar al-jawad and karkariya to the south. [ 109 ] the rsf claimed to have shot down an ilyushin fighter jet over nyala, killing its crew. [ 110 ] the pilot was later identified as major general abulgasem ali. [ 111 ] the national umma party removed fadlallah burma nasir as its acting leader following his cosigning of the government of peace and unity agreement with the rsf. [ 112 ] in response, nasir ordered the dissolution of the party's presidential institution. [ 113 ] an saf antonov an-26 transport aircraft crashed into a residential area of karari, omdurman, during takeoff from wadi seidna air base , killing at least 46 people including major-general bahr ahmed, a senior commander in khartoum. [ 114 ] [ 115 ] the saf recaptured al-khiwai, advancing closer to relieve the siege of el-khiwai. [ 116 ] food aid was halted due to continued attacks on the zamzam camp. [ 117 ] russia called on the un to support the sudanese government's peace efforts and warned against the parallel rsf government that could halt efforts to support stability in sudan. [ 118 ] the rsf launched a drone strike on the merowe power station, leading to a power outage in the city. [ 119 ] the jdf claimed to have intercepted an rsf supply shipment in north darfur and "neutralized" foreign mercenaries, demanding apologies from colombia. the claims were denied by the rsf. [ 120 ] the saf claimed to have dismantled a cell based in the marabi’ al-sharif area of soba sharq, east of khartoum, that counterfeited currency for the rsf and included foreign nationals. [ 121 ] the saf retook station 13 and parts of the el nasr and el huda neighbourhoods in khartoum. [ 122 ] the saf reached the eastern edge of the al-manshia bridge in east nile, khartoum and retook the headquarters of the east nile central reserve forces. [ 123 ] seven people were killed in an saf airstrike on umm kuraydim, north of el obeid. [ 124 ] more than 80 people were killed or injured by rsf shelling on abu shouk idp camp. [ 125 ] the saf retook el dali and el mazmum, the rsf’s last strongholds in sennar state, as well as al-jabalain in white nile state. [ 126 ] sudan filed a case in the international court of justice against the united arab emirates, accusing it of complicity in genocide by providing weapons to the rsf. [ 127 ] canada imposed sanctions on al-burhan and hemedti, citing in part "an unwillingness on the part of the leaders to negotiate an end to the war". [ 128 ] a detention centre operated by the rsf near khartoum was discovered, revealing evidence of torture and a nearby mass grave containing over 500 unmarked graves. [ 129 ] [ 130 ] seven people were killed in an rsf attack on al khiwai, west kordofan , [ 131 ] while two others were killed in rsf drone strikes in al-malha, north darfur. [ 132 ] the saf claimed to have destroyed 47 vehicles and 100 drones belonging to the rsf in el fasher over the course of 10 days. they also claimed that local forces killed 15 fighters and that they recaptured the whole al-salam neighborhood and the lafat taqro buildings in the south of the city. [ 133 ] 10 people were killed by rsf shelling in el fasher, [ 134 ] while two children were killed and eight more were injured by rsf shelling in el obeid. [ 135 ] rsf shelling on el obeid killed one woman and injured four others, bringing the death toll from rsf attacks on the city to 32. [ 136 ] the sudanese government ordered a ban on imports from kenya, citing national security concerns amid criticism over the latter's hosting of the rsf. [ 137 ] the saf claimed to have shot down a drone squadron targeting atbara . [ 136 ] eight civilians were killed in rsf raids on eastern khartoum. [ 138 ] hemedti vowed to carry out new offensives on march 17, the anniversary of the rsf's founding, claiming the rsf had undergone several changes and had made alliances with other groups such as the splm-n. he threatened to invade port sudan and attack atbara, shendi , merowe , al dabbah , and dongola . he also said that countries supporting the saf would "pay the price". [ 139 ] the bodies of 11 people suspected to have been killed by the rsf were recovered from a well in the fayhaa neighborhood of khartoum. [ 140 ] government buildings used by the rsf in ed daein and nyala were destroyed by missiles. [ 141 ] the saf also claimed to have taken control of the family club, khartoum 3, and part of khartoum 2 and cut off the last rsf supply route to the presidential palace . [ 142 ] four people were killed and 30 people were injured including 18 children from rsf shelling in karari, omdurman. [ 143 ] the saf said that its armoured corps had linked up with saf forces at the general command headquarters in khartoum after clearing the people’s teaching hospital from the rsf. [ 144 ] the united nations said the rsf detained more than 60 peacekeepers, abducted eight civilian staff, and seized eight vehicles and 280,000 litres of fuel from a united nations interim security force for abyei (unisfa) logistics convoy heading from a refueling mission in kadugli. [ 145 ] the sudanese government suspended development projects funded by arab and international lenders, including the world bank and african development bank , citing in part concerns over addressing arrears and resuming funding flows due to the ongoing conflict. [ 146 ] the saf claimed to have killed an rsf commander and 15 other fighters in an airstrike in el fasher. [ 147 ] the rsf claimed to have taken al-malha, which the jdf denied, adding that eight senior rsf officers, including field commander colonel ayoub ahimer, had been killed. [ 148 ] the saf retook the republican palace in khartoum from the rsf. [ 149 ] [ 150 ] an rsf drone strike on the palace that same day killed six journalists including two military reporters and four members of a sudan tv crew. [ 151 ] the saf retook the corinthia hotel and the headquarters of the central bank of sudan and the general intelligence service in khartoum from the rsf. [ 152 ] it also retook tuti island , situated at the confluence of the blue nile and the white nile , after advancing through the tuti bridge . [ 153 ] forty-eight people were killed in ethnically-motivated attacks by the rsf in al-malha. [ 154 ] eleven people were killed in an rsf drone strike on the radwan mosque in hilat kuko in east nile area of khartoum. eight people were killed by rsf shelling in el fasher, [ 155 ] while three others were killed by rsf shelling in omdurman. [ 153 ] eighteen people were killed following three days of rsf attacks on villages in gezira state northwest of wad madani. [ 156 ] the rsf claimed to have taken lagawa in west kordofan. [ 155 ] the rsf launched a series of attacks in eastern khartoum, killing at least five people and injuring dozens. [ 157 ] at the same time, the group retreated from the salama, azhari, ad hussein, mayo, gereif west, burri, sahafat and kalakla neighbourhoods of khartoum and were seen moving south towards jebel aulia. [ 158 ] the darfur initiative for justice and peace said that hundreds of civilians were killed in an saf airstrike on the tur'rah market near el fasher. [ 159 ] the saf retook khartoum international airport and the manshiya bridge over the blue nile in khartoum. it also retook the tiba al-hassanab camp in jabal aulia, which is described as the rsf's last stronghold in khartoum and its main base in central sudan. [ 160 ] al-burhan visited the presidential palace in khartoum and announced the liberation of the city , proclaiming that "khartoum is free". [ 161 ] the saf reportedly cleared the last pockets of rsf control south of khartoum and captured jabal awliya . they also claimed to have neutralized 23 rsf personnel and captured an artillery piece. [ 162 ] a swarm of drones attacked the city of ad-damazin in blue nile state , with some explosions and smoke being reported. the saf claimed to have shot down five drones over the armored corps base, 4th infantry division headquarters, and the city's airport. [ 163 ] the saf retook the souq libya market west of omdurman. [ 164 ] the saf and allied fighters repelled an rsf assault on el fasher and attacked a supply convoy, destroying 16 vehicles and killing dozens of rsf fighters. nine civilians were killed and 17 more were injured in rsf shelling. [ 165 ] seven people were killed by rsf shelling on the abu shouk camp. [ 166 ] the rsf claimed to have taken khor el dalaib in south kordofan following clashes that left 12 civilians dead. it also claimed to have killed 70 fighters of the islamic movement, and destroyed or captured 13 vehicles. [ 167 ] two people were killed by rsf shelling on the abu shouk camp. [ 168 ] at least 96 people were killed following four days of attacks on the rsf on al-jumu’iya, south of omdurman. [ 169 ] the rsf claimed to have shot down an saf antonov aircraft over el fasher, killing its eight crew. [ 167 ] more than 100 civilians were killed in clashes in al malha. the rsf was also accused of human rights violations after its capture, including looting, killings, and torture. [ 170 ] the merowe power station was struck by an rsf drone, causing power outages in omdurman and northern state. [ 171 ] at least 15 civilians were killed in clashes between the saf and the rsf in ombadda. [ 172 ] four people were killed in an rsf drone attack on al dabbah , northern state . [ 173 ] the rsf launched a drone attack on dongola airport , destroying a fuel storage facility. [ 174 ] three people were killed by rsf shelling on abu shouk idp camp. [ 175 ] several others were killed in an joint rsf and splm-n (al-hilu) attack in rashad, south kordofan. [ 176 ] the saf retook the al-nusour and al-konan camps as well as the fatasha, al-hilla al-jadida, and iskan al-safwa areas of omdurman from the rsf. [ 177 ] rsf drone and artillery attacks in el obeid and al dabbah killed 13 people. [ 178 ] the international court of justice began hearing sudan's genocide case against the uae. [ 179 ] at least 15 civilians were killed by rsf shelling on the abu shouk camp. the rsf also claimed to have taken umm keddada . [ 180 ] at least 32 civilians were killed in rsf shelling and drone attacks on el fasher. [ 181 ] an rsf attack on zamzam refugee camp killed or injured hundreds, most of them women and children. [ 182 ] the rsf claimed to have taken zamzam refugee camp. [ 183 ] the rsf launched a drone attack on atbara, hitting a fuel depot and a power generation station and causing blackouts. [ 184 ] hemedti officially announced the establishment of the government of peace and unity . [ 185 ] an evening curfew was declared in el fasher in response to rsf attacks. [ 186 ] at least 57 people were killed by rsf shelling in el fasher. [ 187 ] the rsf was accused of killing multiple civilians in an attack on the village of broush in north darfur. [ 188 ] at least 30 people were killed during rsf attacks in el fasher. [ 189 ] at least 55 people were killed following two days of rsf shelling in el fasher. [ 190 ]

the following notable deaths occurred in 2025. names are reported under the date of death, in alphabetical order. a typical entry reports information in the following sequence:

fatima hassouna (1999 [ 1 ] – 16 april 2025), sometimes spelled fatma hassona , was a palestinian photojournalist whose work documented civilian life during the gaza war . she gained international recognition for her visceral documentation of war impacts and became the subject of the documentary film put your soul on your hand and walk , selected for the acid film programme shown during the 2025 cannes film festival . [ 2 ] she was killed alongside ten family members in an israeli airstrike on their gaza city home on 16 april 2025. [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] hassouna was born in gaza city and graduated with a multimedia degree from the university college of applied sciences in gaza. she began documenting life in gaza after the escalation of hostilities on 7 october 2023 . [ 3 ] as one of few local journalists able to document the war after israel banned foreign reporters from gaza, hassouna chronicled forced civilian evacuations under israeli military orders; [ 3 ] destruction of infrastructure from airstrikes; civilian casualties and funeral rituals; and moments of resilience, including children playing in ruins. [ 7 ] on 15 april 2025, she posted her final instagram story showing a gaza sunset with the caption: "it's the first sunset in a long time". [ 3 ] put your soul on your hand and walk (2025), directed by sepideh farsi , features video conversations between hassouna and the director. the film was selected for cannes' acid parallel section, an independent film programme shown during the official cannes film festival. [ 8 ] in their final exchange, hassouna told farsi: "i’ll come to cannes, but i have to return to gaza. i don’t want to leave". [ 4 ] hassouna and ten relatives including her pregnant sister were killed when an israeli missile struck their family home in gaza city's al-touffah neighborhood on 16 april 2025. [ 9 ] [ 10 ] the attack occurred one day after her documentary's selection for cannes was announced. [ 10 ] she had previously written on social media "if i die, i want a loud death". [ 9 ] the israel defense forces stated they targeted "a hamas member involved in attacks against israeli soldiers", claiming use of precision weapons. [ 3 ] director sepideh farsi rejected this justification: "i know the whole family. it's nonsense". [ 11 ] france's acid organization described hassouna as having "a smile as magical as her tenacity". over 200 journalists had been killed in gaza by april 2025 according to press freedom groups. [ 7 ] the international federation of journalists recorded 157 media worker deaths in the conflict zone since october 2023. [ 10 ] [ 5 ]

francis john davis (august 30, 1946 – april 14, 2025) was an american author and journalist known for having been the jazz critic for the village voice and a contributing editor for the atlantic . he also worked in radio and film, and taught courses on jazz and blues at the university of pennsylvania . he was a 1994 recipient of the pew fellowships in the arts . francis john davis was born in philadelphia on august 30, 1946. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] he was raised in southwest philadelphia by his mother, who worked as a medical clerk, and his grandmother; he never knew his father. [ 4 ] [ 2 ] as a teenager, he worked part time at the free library of philadelphia and graduated from john bartram high school . [ 4 ] [ 2 ] he attended temple university from 1964 to 1969. [ 4 ] davis worked as the jazz critic for the philadelphia inquirer from 1978 to 1983. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] in 1987, when fresh air began broadcasting nationally with gross as host, davis served as the program's first jazz critic, hosting a weekly radio jazz feature. [ 6 ] [ 2 ] davis began writing for the atlantic in 1984, leading its jazz coverage. [ 2 ] along with his jazz writing he tackled a wide variety of subjects, such as seinfeld [ 7 ] and johnny cash , [ 8 ] for whom he published what many fans consider the definitive appreciation, in the atlantic . davis was characterized by his keen insights into the development of american style and culture, with asides in the first person which balance his theoretical certainty with a witty, human element. his articles and essays on figures such as frank sinatra and anthony davis impart a sharp picture of a writer coming of age, and aging, with the artists of his generation. [ 2 ] over the last few decades of his life he sat with betty carter , sonny rollins , wynton marsalis , sun ra , [ 2 ] and the late new yorker film critic, pauline kael , after whose lengthy discussions davis penned, afterglow: a last conversation with pauline kael . [ 4 ] along with international publication davis was widely recognized with awards, including a guggenheim fellowship in 1992, and a pew fellowship the following year. he was a multiple recipient of the ascap - deems taylor award, [ 4 ] and was nominated for a grammy award in 1989 (with martin williams and dick katz) for his liner notes to jazz piano for the smithsonian collection of recordings. davis won the 2008 grammy award for best album notes, for the miles davis album, kind of blue : 50th anniversary collector's edition. [ 4 ] stanley crouch , a famed jazz critic who frequently wrote about race relations, took davis to task in a 2003 jazz times column for allegedly speaking with condescension toward the predominantly black contingent of musicians who create "jazz that is based on swing and blues." because of what crouch alleged to be underlying racial resentment and fear, davis "lifts up someone like, say, dave douglas as an antidote to too much authority from the dark side of the tracks," according to crouch. [ 9 ] crouch was fired from jazz times after writing the column. [ 10 ] in 2004, davis inherited the main jazz column at the village voice from gary giddins . [ 4 ] in 2006, he started the year-end jazz critics poll. he ran the poll at the village voice until 2011, later running it at npr music from 2013 to 2020. [ 2 ] [ 4 ] the poll moved to the arts fuse in 2022. [ 11 ] while at temple, davis worked at the listening booth, a record store on the university of pennsylvania campus. [ 4 ] while working there, he met terry gross , his future wife. [ 4 ] [ 2 ] the two married in 1994. [ 4 ] in the autumn of 2024, davis moved into hospice , having been diagnosed with emphysema and parkinson's disease . he died at home in philadelphia at the age of 78 on april 14, 2025. [ 4 ]

werner thissen (3 december 1938 – 15 april 2025) was a german prelate of the catholic church . he was auxiliary bishop of the diocese of münster from 1999 to 2002, serving the borken - steinfurt region. he then served as archbishop of hamburg until 2014 when he resigned and became archbishop emeritus. born in kleve on 3 december 1938, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] thissen achieved his abitur at the collegium augustinianum gaesdonck [ de ] . he first studied economics at the university of cologne . [ 1 ] [ 3 ] he then studied catholic theology and philosophy at the university of münster and in munich . [ 1 ] thissen was ordained as a priest in münster on 29 june 1966. [ 1 ] he worked as a chaplain in st. josef [ de ] in dorsten , then from 1969 as spiritual at the collegium johanneum in schloss loburg [ de ] in ostbevern and from 1971 to 1977 subregens [ de ] at the seminary of the diocese of münster . [ 2 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] he achieved the doctorate in theology with a dissertation about the gospel of mark in 1974. [ 1 ] [ 5 ] he worked from 1977 as head of the department seelsorge (spiritual care) in the administration of the diocese ( generalvikariat ) and received the title geistlicher rat [ de ] the same year. in 1984 he became a member of the cathedral chapter of münster cathedral . bishop reinhard lettmann appointed him vicar general in 1986. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] during this time, thissen worked for ten years as a speaker of the ard 's weekly ecumenical broadcast das wort zum sonntag [ de ] . on 16 april 1999, he was appointed auxiliary bishop of münster and titular bishop of scampa [ de ] . [ 2 ] thissen received his episcopal consecration on the following 24 may [ 1 ] from bishop lettmann, with bishops alfons demming and heinrich janssen [ de ] serving as co-consecrators . he chose for his motto "in christo nova creatura" (a new creation in christ). [ 1 ] he was responsible for the borken - steinfurt region. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 4 ] in a later interview from november 2019, he admitted serious mistakes related to sexual abuse in the catholic church [ de ] during his time in office, [ 6 ] and asked those who were abused for forgiveness. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] thissen served in the german bishops' conference as the bishop responsible for the misereor [ de ] charity organisation from 2000 to 2014. [ 1 ] he was named archbishop of hamburg by pope john paul ii on 22 november 2002; he was installed on 25 january 2003. [ 2 ] [ 4 ] he is credited with the development of the young diocese. one of his initiatives was to call people to meeting each other in pastoral conversations titled salz im norden . he also worked for a restoration of the st. mary's cathedral , including new features. he initiated the process to beatify the lübeck martyrs . [ 1 ] [ 7 ] thissen resigned at age 75, which was granted by pope francis on 21 march 2014, [ 1 ] [ 8 ] and subsequently became archbishop emeritus of hamburg . [ 9 ] thissen died in hamburg on 15 april 2025 at the age of 86. [ 1 ] [ 5 ] [ 7 ]

joseph thompson (5 march 1989 – 17 april 2025) was an english professional footballer who played as a midfielder for rochdale , tranmere rovers , carlisle united , southport and bury . [ 4 ] [ 5 ] thompson was born on 5 march 1989 in bath , somerset. [ 6 ] raised in his birth city, he moved to manchester to live with his aunt when his mother was admitted to a psychiatric hospital. [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] he had two siblings, a brother and a sister. [ 10 ] thompson revealed that "his father was absent in their life and said: he'd gone down the wrong path and became addicted to hard drugs. i think he has spent 12 of the last 20 years behind bars and missed out seeing me and my brother achieve some great things in life." [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] he had a "turbulent" childhood, "witnessing his father abusing his mother physically and verbally, his younger brother reuben being struck by a hit-and-run driver – he remembers the tyre mark on the face of reuben, who made a full recovery from his injuries – and his mother suffering a breakdown when he was eight." [ 11 ] [ 9 ] [ 13 ] attending st vincent's primary school, st cuthbert's high school and hopwood hall school, thompson excelled in athletics and was a good 800-metre runner, but "wanted to be a part of something on a long term". [ 14 ] [ 10 ] [ 9 ] [ 13 ] [ 15 ] [ 8 ] this led thompson to begin playing football for a local team "as a way of integrating". [ 10 ] in 1998, he joined manchester united 's youth team and played alongside james chester , danny drinkwater and tom cleverley . [ 10 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] at school, thompson said "that football slowly turned him from an outsider into one of the gang" and that he had an air of arrogance and confidence in any situation, as he was good at something but his teachers warned him that he still needed to concentrate on his studies in case he "might not make it"; it did not stop him from "practising his signature on scraps of paper at the back of the classroom". [ 10 ] thompson said life was "great" for him until at age 16, he learned that manchester united released him because he was small. [ 10 ] [ 16 ] [ 11 ] thompson said his release was difficult to take that he did not tell any of his friends for at least two weeks, stating: "i'd always been a winner – the best at football, athletics and basketball – but now i was a loser." [ 10 ] determined to become a footballer, thompson went on trials at blackburn rovers and liverpool but failed to win a contract. [ 10 ] one day, his teacher told him to "go down to rochdale ". [ 10 ] initially reluctant as "he thought he was better than that", thompson ended up relenting and joined the club, as he realised it did not matter what team he played for in the past, as long as, everyone were all in the same boat". [ 10 ] soon, thompson was told by rochdale's management that "he soon be playing for the first team." [ 10 ] aged seventeen, thompson made his debut for the club, coming on as an 83rd-minute substitute, in a 2–0 loss against carlisle united on 2 may 2006 during the 2005–06 season , in what turned out to be his only appearance of the season. [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] thompson made his first appearance of the 2006–07 season, coming on as an 86th-minute substitute, in a 1–0 loss against swindon town on 12 august 2006. [ 20 ] he then made his first start for the club against milton keynes dons on 23 december 2006 and started the whole game, in a 2–1 loss. [ 21 ] in a follow–up match against wrexham , thompson set up rochdale's second goal of the game and helped the club draw 2–2. [ 22 ] following this, he was given more playing time for the rest of the 2006–07 season. [ 23 ] at the end of the 2006–07 season, thompson went on to make thirteen appearances in all competitions. for his performance, he was awarded the league two apprentice award. [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] after this achievement, manager keith hill hoped thompson would continue to make progress. [ 27 ] ahead of the 2007–08 season, thompson signed his first professional contract with rochdale on 5 july 2007. [ 1 ] [ 28 ] after missing the opening game of the season against peterborough united due to injury, he made his first appearance of the season, coming on as a 62nd-minute substitute, in a 2–1 loss against chester city . [ 29 ] however, thompson was plagued with an injury that kept him out for two months. [ 30 ] he returned from injury on 26 december 2007, coming on as a late substitute in a 2–0 win against wrexham. [ 31 ] five days later on 1 january 2008, thompson scored his first goal for the club, in a 3–1 win over darlington . [ 32 ] however, he continued to be plagued with injuries on three occasions, as the 2007–08 season progressed. [ 33 ] rochdale went on to reach the play–off final against stockport county , only to lose 3–2. [ 34 ] at the end of the 2007–08 season, thompson went on to make thirteen appearances and scoring once in all competitions. at the start of the 2008–09 season, thompson missed the first seven league matches of the season, due to an injury. [ 35 ] he made his return from injury, coming on as an 88th-minute substitute, in a 3–1 win against accrington stanley on 28 september 2008. [ 36 ] since returning from injury, this proved to be thompson's breakthrough season under the management of keith hill, as he received more playing time. [ 37 ] thompson scored his first goal of the season on 25 october 2008 in a 3–1 win over aldershot town . [ 38 ] he then scored a hat-trick in a 4–2 victory against aldershot town on 31 january 2009, scoring against them three times this season. [ 39 ] this was followed by scoring in the next game on 3 february 2009 in a 2–0 win over chester city . [ 40 ] after the match, thompson's performance, along with attacking tactics were praised by manager hill. [ 41 ] having helped rochdale qualify for the league two play–offs , he played in both legs against gillingham , as the club lost 2–1 on aggregate. [ 42 ] despite being sidelined on three more occasions later in the 2008–09 season, thompson made thirty–five appearances and scoring five times in all competitions. [ 43 ] following this, he was rewarded with a new one-year contract after being offered a new contract by rochdale. [ 44 ] in the opening game of the 2009–10 season, thompson started the season well when he scored a goal and won a man of the match award against port vale . [ 45 ] since then, thompson was involved in a number of first team matches, playing in the midfield position. [ 46 ] a few weeks later, on 29 august 2009, he scored his second goal of the season in a 3–0 win over bury. [ 47 ] six days later on 5 september 2009, thompson scored his third goal of the season, in a 3–3 draw against morecambe . [ 48 ] his next goal came on 7 november 2009 when he scored a vital late brace against luton town in the first round of the fa cup to take the fixture to a replay. [ 49 ] however, in the fa cup replay against luton town, rochdale lost 2–0, eliminating the club from the competition. [ 50 ] after missing one match, due to injury, thompson scored on his return from injury, in a 3–1 win over lincoln city . [ 51 ] after being sidelined for weeks due to a knee injury, he made his return from injury, coming on as an 82nd-minute substitute, in a 1–1 draw against lincoln city on 6 march 2010. [ 52 ] this was followed up by scoring his seventh goal of the season, in a 1–0 win against shrewsbury town . [ 53 ] two weeks later on 27 march 2010, thompson scored his eighth goal of the season, in a 4–1 win against grimsby town . [ 54 ] rochdale were later promoted to league one after beating northampton town 1–0 on 17 april 2010. [ 55 ] at the end of the 2009–10 season, he made thirty–nine appearances and scoring eight times in all competitions. following this, thompson's performances resulted in him being rewarded with a new-two year deal with the club. [ 56 ] the manchester evening news described the player as the "most improved member of the squad displaying great maturity in his performances, offering defensive cover and an outlet going forward. a fringe player in recent seasons, the youngster has proved his credentials with a string of impressive displays". [ 57 ] at the start of the 2010–11 season, thompson started the season well when he set up the only goal of the game, in a 1–0 win against barnsley in the first round of the league cup. [ 58 ] however, thompson continued to be involved in the first team, as he soon found himself rotating in and out of the starting line–up, as well as, facing his own injury concern. [ 59 ] in early–february, thompson suffered a thigh injury while training and missed nine matches as a result. [ 60 ] but he made his return to the first team from injury against hartlepool united on 25 march 2011, coming on as an 85th-minute substitute, in a 2–0 loss. [ 61 ] following this, thompson scored his first goal of the season, in a 2–0 win against southampton on 11 april 2011. [ 62 ] he then scored his second goal of the season, in a 3–2 win against carlisle united on 23 april 2011. [ 63 ] at the end of the 2010–11 season, thompson went on to make thirty–four appearances and scoring three times in all competitions. for his performance, he was named dale dragons young player of the season. [ 64 ] at the start of the 2011–12 season, thompson found his playing time, mostly coming from the substitute bench. [ 65 ] after being sidelined for a month due to his fitness concern, he made his return to the first team against aldershot town in the third round of the league cup on 20 september 2011, coming on as a 71st-minute substitute, in a 2–1 loss. [ 66 ] however, his return was short–lived when thompson suffered a thigh injury and was out for almost three months. [ 67 ] it was not until on 31 december 2011 when he made his return from injury, starting a match and played 69 minutes before being substituted, in a 0–0 draw against walsall . [ 68 ] following this, thompson found his playing time, coming from the substitute bench for the rest of the 2011–12 season. [ 69 ] it was not until on 14 april 2012 when he scored his first goal of the season, in a 3–2 win against exeter city . [ 70 ] however, thompson was unable to help rochdale avoid relegation after the club lost 2–1 to chesterfield . [ 71 ] at the end of the 2011–12 season, he went on to make twenty–one appearances and scoring once in all competitions. shortly after the end of the 2011–12 season, thompson was offered a new contract by rochdale. [ 72 ] having yet to reach his decision after two months, he featured in the pre-season friendly match against blackburn rovers and scored the only goal of the game. [ 73 ] however, thompson then announced his intention to play abroad, but because he was under 24, he could not leave the club on a free transfer, and was soon linked with a move to tranmere rovers. [ 74 ] on 3 august 2012, thompson signed a two-year deal with league one side tranmere rovers after signing for an undisclosed fee from rochdale. [ 75 ] [ 76 ] upon joining the club, he was given a number seven shirt. [ 76 ] thompson explained his move joining tranmere rovers, citing the impact of the maturity he made. [ 77 ] thompson made his debut for the club in the first round of the league cup, starting and playing 120 minutes in a 2–1 win over chesterfield on 14 august. [ 78 ] four days later, he made his league debut for tranmere, starting the whole game, in a 3–1 win over leyton orient . [ 79 ] in a follow–up match against carlisle united, he set the opening goal of the game for andy robinson , who scored a hat–trick, in a 3–0 win. [ 80 ] however, thompson found himself out of the starting line–up, due to his own injury concerns and his playing time coming from the substitute bench. [ 81 ] despite this, he scored his first goal for the club on 6 october, in a 1–0 win over notts county . [ 82 ] thompson scored his second goal of the season, in the first round of the fa cup, in a 3–0 win over braintree town on 13 november. [ 83 ] after being recalled by tranmere, he appeared two more matches towards the end of the 2012–13 season. [ 84 ] at the end of the 2012–13 season, thompson went on to make thirty-four appearances and scoring twice in all competitions. upon recovering from his injury, thompson re-joined rochdale on loan until the end of the season. [ 85 ] he made his second debut for the club, coming on as a 65th-minute substitute, in a 3–0 loss against morecambe on 2 march 2013. [ 86 ] thompson was in the first team regular at rochdale until he was recalled by his parent club on 4 april. [ 87 ] by the time thompson was recalled by the club, he made seven appearances for the club. at the beginning of the 2013–14 season, thompson started the season well when he scored twice in a 3–3 draw with crawley town on 10 august 2013 after being on the bench in the opening game of the season against walsall . [ 88 ] thompson continued to be involved in the first team, playing in the right–midfield position. [ 89 ] however, he continued to suffer setback with injuries and was out on two occasions. [ 90 ] following the announcement of his diagnosis with nodular sclerosis hodgkin lymphoma , a rare form of cancer , it was announced that thompson would be out for the remainder of the 2013–14 season. [ 91 ] in tranmere's first match since the announcement against preston north end , both sets of fans held a minute's applause in the 7th minute for the player. [ 92 ] although the club were relegated to league two at the end of the season, he went on to finish the season, making eight appearances and scoring two times in all competitions. [ 93 ] following this, tranmere were in discussions with thompson over a new contract. [ 94 ] however, the club released the player when his contract expired and was let go. [ 95 ] upon joining bury, he later criticised tranmere for the way they handled the contract negotiations during his absence, and was released by the club. [ 96 ] on 2 august 2014, thompson announced via his twitter account that he had signed a one-year contract at bury . [ 96 ] his move came after thompson went on trial with the club and was featured in the pre-season friendly matches. [ 97 ] [ 98 ] upon signing, thompson was described by manager david flitcroft as an "inspiration", citing his improvement of his mental strength. [ 95 ] he made his bury debut in the first round of the league cup, against bolton wanderers , coming on as an 85th-minute substitute, in a 3–2 loss. [ 99 ] thompson made three more appearances for the club, all of them were coming from the substitute bench. [ 100 ] however, he spent most of the first half of the season on the bench due to a lack of match fitness. [ 101 ] at the end of the 2014–15 season, thompson was one of four players released by bury. [ 102 ] on 27 november 2014, it was announced that thompson would be loaned out to wrexham until 4 january 2015. [ 103 ] he made his only appearance for the club against southport on 16 december, only to injure his hamstring and was substituted as a result. [ 104 ] however, thompson returned to bury when his loan expired at wrexham. [ 105 ] on 14 february 2015, thompson signed for southport on a one-month loan. [ 106 ] he made his debut for the club on the same day, in a 1–1 draw against macclesfield town . [ 107 ] after making four appearances for southport, thompson returned to his parent club. on 21 april, thompson joined st johnstone on trial. however, his trial expired after he failed to earn a contract offer from the club. [ 108 ] after an unsuccessful trial at st johnstone, thompson began training with carlisle united . [ 109 ] after being offered a new contract by the club, he signed a six-month contract with carlisle united on 31 july 2015. [ 110 ] upon joining the club, thompson was given a number twenty–three shirt. [ 111 ] he made his debut for carlisle united against cambridge united on 15 august, starting a match and playing 75 minutes before being substituted, in a 4–4 draw. [ 112 ] in a follow–up match, thompson scored his first goal for the club, in a 4–1 loss against plymouth argyle . [ 113 ] since joining carlisle united, he found his playing time, mostly coming from the substitute bench. [ 114 ] despite this, thompson signed a contract extension with the club until the end of the 2015–16 season. [ 115 ] at the end of the season, he went on to make seventeen appearances and scoring once in all competitions. reflecting this, thompson said: "i ended up playing about 15–20 games during that season, which wasn't much, but it was progress at least." [ 10 ] however, he was released at the end of the season. [ 116 ] on 7 august 2016, thompson re-joined rochdale on a six-month deal. [ 117 ] upon joining the club, he said: "everyone is well aware of what has gone on in my life and i know that the club supported me really well through my hard times, so i want to give back". [ 118 ] thompson made his third debut for rochdale, coming on as an 80th-minute substitute, in a 2–1 win against chesterfield in the first round of the league cup. [ 119 ] since joining the club, he found himself in and out of the first team, playing in the midfield position. [ 120 ] this lasted until thompson suffered an injury in the 19th minute during a 3–0 win against southend united on 8 october. [ 121 ] after being sidelined for three weeks, he made his return to the first team from injury, coming on as a 68th-minute substitute, in a 1–0 win against oldham athletic on 29 october. [ 122 ] thompson followed up by starting in the next seven matches, playing in different midfield positions. [ 123 ] on 2 december, thompson signed a contract extension with rochdale, keeping him until 2018. [ 124 ] eight days later, he scored his rochdale goal in four years, in a 3–2 win against scunthorpe united . [ 125 ] during a 2–0 win against walsall in which he scored his second goal of the season, [ 126 ] thompson suffered a back injury that saw him sidelined for a month. [ 127 ] it was not until on 11 february 2017 when he made his return from injury, starting a match and playing 45 minutes before being substituted, in a 0–0 draw against fleetwood town . [ 128 ] thompson then scored his third goal of the season, in a 3–1 loss against peterborough united on 25 february. [ 129 ] however, he was sidelined for the rest of the 2016–17 season after his cancer had returned. [ 14 ] [ 130 ] on two occasions against gillingham on 18 march and his former club bury on 13 april, both sets of fans held a minute's applause in the 15th minute for the player. [ 131 ] at the end of the 2016–17 season, thompson went on to make twenty–seven appearances and scoring three times in all competitions. after being in remission following his battle with cancer for a second time, manager keith hill said he was not rushing thompson back to the first team. [ 132 ] as a result, thompson spent the next six months on the sidelines. [ 133 ] thompson made his return to the first team from injury, coming on as a 72nd-minute substitute and was given a standing ovation by both supporters, in a 1–1 draw against walsall on 23 december 2017. [ 134 ] after the match, he spoke about his return to the pitch following his battle with cancer. [ 135 ] since returning from the sidelines, thompson found his playing time, coming from the substitute bench, appearing four times for rochdale between december and february. [ 136 ] after a month absence, he made his return to the first team against portsmouth on 7 april 2018, coming on as 73rd-minute substitute, in a 3–3 draw. [ 137 ] with his return, thompson contributed to the club's improved results in the remaining six matches of the season. [ 138 ] this included scoring in the last game of the season against charlton athletic , which turned out to be the only goal of the game, as rochdale avoided relegation. [ 139 ] following this, he was awarded 'laureus sporting moment of the year award'. [ 140 ] at the end of the 2017–18 season, thompson went on to make eleven appearances and scoring once in all competitions. and signed a contract extension. [ 141 ] ahead of the 2018–19 season, thompson appeared five times out of the six rochdale's pre–season matches. [ 142 ] he made his only appearance of the 2018–19 season against burton albion in the opening game of the season, coming on as a 64th-minute substitute, in a 2–1 win. [ 143 ] following this, thompson was on the sidelines for the next six months. [ 144 ] on 5 february 2019, thompson announced his retirement from professional football. [ 145 ] explaining his retirement on rochdale's website, he said: "my decision to retire has been one of the hardest i've ever had to make. after several discussions with my specialists and consultants it is with a heavy heart that i am retiring from the game i love. i have battled through some of life's hardest challenges and have managed to overcome them. however, i've pushed my body to the absolute limit." [ 145 ] in the club's first match against coventry city 's first match since his announcement, thompson was given a guard of honour by both teams. [ 146 ] on 5 april, he was awarded the sir tom finney award. [ 147 ] rochdale announced on their website on 11 june 2019 that the club would be holding his testimonial match. [ 148 ] following his retirement from professional football, thompson worked as a motivational speaker. [ 149 ] in april 2021, thompson was announced as the co-presenter of bbc squad goals [ 150 ] with sanny rudravajhala and lucy oliva. [ 151 ] [ 152 ] the show is networked across local bbc radio on bbc sounds and on the bbc sport website. thompson also studied level two coaching certificate and "achieved his btec national certificate with a potential merit/distinction profile". [ 26 ] in september 2018, his former school, st vincent's primary school, named their multi use games arena after him. [ 153 ] a month later, he launched his autobiography darkness and light: my story and held a book signing at the spotland stadium . [ 154 ] in the book, thompson credited his agent gary lloyd, who died in 2017, for him to write a book and "considered him to be was more than an agent, more than a friend; he was a father figure who gave the player guidance." [ 11 ] [ 13 ] thompson married his wife, chantelle, in 2016, and became a father in september 2014 when his partner gave birth to a daughter. [ 13 ] [ 77 ] [ 10 ] [ 155 ] [ 19 ] on 1 november 2013, it emerged that thompson had been diagnosed with nodular sclerosis hodgkin lymphoma , a rare form of cancer , and that he would immediately begin chemotherapy as treatment for the disease. [ 91 ] [ 8 ] tranmere rovers chief executive mick horton said, "joe will get all the love and support we can give him". [ 91 ] the diagnosis shocked his former teammate jack redshaw , then teammate ryan lowe (who dedicated his goal against accrington stanley on 9 november 2013 to him), and former managers, keith hill and ronnie moore . [ 156 ] this led to a campaign for grow 4 joe challenge for the player. [ 157 ] he later credited tennis player ross hutchins , who successfully recovered from the same cancer, as the inspiration for him to fight against cancer. [ 98 ] [ 158 ] on 16 june 2014, thompson announced on his twitter that he had completed remission after months of chemotherapy and "couldn't wait" to get back out on the football pitch. [ 159 ] on 16 march 2017, thompson announced in a statement on the rochdale website that his cancer had returned. [ 14 ] [ 8 ] thompson adopted a vegan diet to rebuild his body quicker. [ 19 ] in june 2017, he ended up beating cancer for the second time two months later. [ 160 ] [ 9 ] thompson later reflected about beating cancer for the second time, saying: "i'm 99 per cent sure it's not coming back. but then if it does, i've got over it before so i can get over it again. i'm not scared, i look forward to life. i've got aspirations. this game is all about winning. and what i've been through has taught me that i've got the tools not only to win a few football matches but to win the game of life." [ 9 ] in april 2024, thompson revealed that he had been diagnosed with cancer for the third time. he had stage four lymphoma which had spread to his lungs. [ 161 ] thompson died on 17 april 2025, at the age of 36. [ 162 ]

kyren pierre lacy (december 27, 2000 – april 12, 2025) was an american college football player who was a wide receiver for the louisiana ragin' cajuns and lsu tigers . during his college football career, lacy had 162 receptions for 2,360 yards and had 26 touchdowns in 64 games. in the 2024 season, he caught 58 passes for 866 yards, tied for the southeastern conference (sec) lead with nine touchdown catches and was a second-team all-sec receiver. kyren pierre lacy was born on december 27, 2000, in thibodaux, louisiana , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] where he grew up and attended thibodaux high school . [ 4 ] as a senior, he had 54 receptions for 864 yards and 18 touchdowns . ranked as the 10th wide receiver in louisiana for the 2020 class, he committed to university of louisiana at lafayette to play college football as a three-star recruit, declining offers from houston , louisiana–monroe , louisiana tech , miami , and virginia . [ 5 ] as a true freshman at the university of louisiana, lafayette, in 2020, lacy played in 11 games and had 28 receptions for 364 yards and four touchdowns. [ 6 ] in 2021, he played in 13 games and had 22 receptions for 304 yards and six touchdowns. [ 7 ] after two seasons, he transferred to louisiana state university (lsu). [ 8 ] he started 2 of 14 games his first year at lsu in 2022, recording 24 receptions for 268 yards. [ 9 ] as the third receiver in the lsu depth chart behind malik nabers and brian thomas jr. , lacy started 10 of 13 games and had 30 receptions for 558 yards and seven touchdowns. [ 5 ] he returned to lsu for the 2024 season as the number one receiver. [ 10 ] in the 2024 season, he had 58 catches for 866 yards, tied for the sec lead with nine touchdown receptions and was a second-team all-sec receiver. [ 1 ] on december 19, he announced his plan to declare for the 2025 nfl draft . [ 11 ] during his college football tenure, lacy caught 162 passes for 2,360 yards and had 26 touchdowns in 64 games. [ 1 ] on january 10, 2025, louisiana state police issued an arrest warrant for lacy. he was accused of speeding and illegally passing people on louisiana highway 20 , causing a head-on car crash that killed a 78-year-old passenger on december 17, 2024. lacy reportedly fled the scene without calling authorities or emergency services. [ 14 ] lacy was arrested on january 12, after he agreed with authorities to turn himself in. he was released on the same day on a $151,000 bail and charged with negligent homicide , felony hit-and-run with death, and reckless operation of a vehicle by the lafourche parish sheriff's office. [ 15 ] lacy died on april 12, 2025, in houston , texas, at the age of 24. [ 16 ] his death occurred two days before a scheduled grand jury hearing related to the december 2024 car crash. [ 17 ] [ 18 ] harris county authorities stated that on the day of his death, lacy got into a verbal argument with a family member that resulted in lacy discharging a firearm into the ground before fleeing the scene. a vehicle pursuit with the police occurred, lasting several miles, and ended when lacy's vehicle crashed. lacy was found dead in his car, appearing to have died by suicide by firearm prior to the crash as both the body camera and dashcam revealed no shots were fired after the pursuit ended. [ 19 ] [ 20 ]

aliza magen-halevi ( hebrew : עליזה מגן-הלוי ‎; 5 july 1937 – 14 april 2025), was an israeli intelligence officer. she served in the mossad , israel's national intelligence agency, for over 40 years from 1958 to 1999, participating in hundreds of covert operations, including operation damocles , operation diamond , and operation wrath of god . in 1990, she was named the mossad's deputy director, becoming the highest-ranking woman in the agency's history. she served in this position under three mossad directors until her retirement in 1999. magen was born to german immigrants in mandatory palestine [ 2 ] on 5 july 1937 and grew up in the rehavia neighborhood of jerusalem. [ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] she married avraham magen, who died in 2011. the couple had no children. [ 2 ] after joining the mossad in 1958, [ 5 ] she became involved in hundreds of covert operations in israel and abroad. in the 1960s, she participated in operation damocles for which she was sent to salzburg, austria, in 1962 to recruit a german scientist who was working for egyptian president gamal abdel nasser . she later worked at the mossad station in germany. [ 6 ] magen also participated in operation diamond , the mossad operation to recruit iraqi pilot munir redfa . [ 7 ] according to magen-halevi, her reports attracted the attention of then-director isser harel . harel assigned magen-halevi and mossad officer yehudit nessyahu to locate yossele schumacher , who had been abducted by his haredi orthodox jewish grandparents. magen-halevi convinced ruth ben david, who had smuggled schumacher out of israel, to reveal schumacher's location. [ 8 ] she was also involved in operation wrath of god , the mossad's retaliation campaign after the 1972 munich massacre . [ 3 ] [ 4 ] in 1980, magen was appointed deputy head of the tzomet branch, then became head of the administration branch in 1984. [ 7 ] magen-halevi was appointed deputy director of the mossad in 1990 [ 9 ] and served under three successive mossad directors: shabtai shavit , danny yatom , and efraim halevy . [ 8 ] [ 4 ] as deputy director, magen took part in planning for a failed assassination of hamas leader khaled meshaal and approved the operation to install bugging devices in the switzerland apartment of hezbollah fundraiser abdullah zein. [ 7 ] she was publicly identified by the first letter of her name in a profile run by yediot ahronot as part of israel's newspaper wars of the 1990s. she was asked to stay on as deputy director when efraim halevy was appointed director in march 1998. [ 10 ] she retired the following year. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] magen was among the female mossad operatives profiled by israeli journalists michael bar-zohar and nissim mishal in their 2021 book the mossad amazons . [ 11 ] magen died in jerusalem on 14 april 2025. [ a ] [ 1 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] upon her death, the mossad released a statement saying, "the mossad family bows its head in deep sorrow over the loss of our comrade aliza – a respected, trailblazing and dedicated commander who devoted her life to the security of israel and its citizens. aliza was one of the pillars of the mossad, and she left a profound mark on generations of agency personnel, who were trained according to her legacy and values." [ 2 ]

this page provides a place to discuss new items for inclusion on in the news (itn), a protected template on the main page (see past items in the itn archives ). do not report errors in itn items that are already on the main page here— discuss those at the relevant section of wp:errors . this candidates page is integrated with the daily pages of portal:current events . a light green header appears under each daily section – it includes transcluded portal:current events items for that day. you can discuss itn candidates under the header. all articles linked in the itn template must pass our standards of review . they should be up-to-date, demonstrate relevance via good sourcing and have at least an acceptable quality. the better your article's quality, the better it covers the event and the wider its perceived significance (see wp:itnsignif for details), the better your chances of getting the blurb posted. format your comment to contain " support " or " oppose ", and include a rationale for your choice. in particular, address the notability of the event, the quality of the article, and whether it has been updated. there are two places where you can request corrections to posted items: february–march 2005 • april 2005 • may 2005 • june 2005 • july 2005 • august 2005 • september 2005 • october 2005 • november 2005 • december 2005 • january 2006 • february 2006 • march 2006 • april 2006 • may 2006 • june 2006 • july 2006 • august 2006 • september 2006 • october 2006 • november 2006 • december 2006 • january 2007 • february 2007 • march 2007 • april 2007 • may 2007 • june 2007 • july 2007 • august 2007 • september 2007 • october 2007 • november 2007 • december 2007 • january 2008 • february 2008 • march 2008 • april 2008 • may 2008 • june 2008 • july 2008 • august 2008 • september 2008 • october 2008 • november 2008 • december 2008 • january 2009 • february 2009 • march 2009 • april 2009 • may 2009 • june 2009 • july 2009 • august 2009 • september 2009 • october 2009 • november 2009 • december 2009 • january 2010 • february 2010 • march 2010 • april 2010 • may 2010 • june 2010 • july 2010 • august 2010 • september 2010 • october 2010 • november 2010 • december 2010 • january 2011 • february 2011 • march 2011 • april 2011 • may 2011 • june 2011 • july 2011 • august 2011 • september 2011 • october 2011 • november 2011 • december 2011 • january 2012 • february 2012 • march 2012 • april 2012 • may 2012 • june 2012 • july 2012 • august 2012 • september 2012 • october 2012 • november 2012 • december 2012 • january 2013 • february 2013 • march 2013 • april 2013 • may 2013 • june 2013 • july 2013 • august 2013 • september 2013 • october 2013 • november 2013 • december 2013 • january 2014 • february 2014 • march 2014 • april 2014 • may 2014 • june 2014 • july 2014 • august 2014 • september 2014 • october 2014 • november 2014 • december 2014 • january 2015 • february 2015 • march 2015 • april 2015 • may 2015 • june 2015 • july 2015 • august 2015 • september 2015 • october 2015 • november 2015 • december 2015 • january 2016 • february 2016 • march 2016 • april 2016 • may 2016 • june 2016 • july 2016 • august 2016 • september 2016 • october 2016 • november 2016 • december 2016 • january 2017 • february 2017 • march 2017 • april 2017 • may 2017 • june 2017 • july 2017 • august 2017 • september 2017 • october 2017 • november 2017 • december 2017 • january 2018 • february 2018 • march 2018 • april 2018 • may 2018 • june 2018 • july 2018 • august 2018 • september 2018 • october 2018 • november 2018 • december 2018 • january 2019 • february 2019 • march 2019 • april 2019 • may 2019 • june 2019 • july 2019 • august 2019 • september 2019 • october 2019 • november 2019 • december 2019 • january 2020 • february 2020 • march 2020 • april 2020 • may 2020 • june 2020 • july 2020 • august 2020 • september 2020 • october 2020 • november 2020 • december 2020 • january 2021 • february 2021 • march 2021 • april 2021 • may 2021 • june 2021 • july 2021 • august 2021 • september 2021 • october 2021 • november 2021 • december 2021 • january 2022 • february 2022 • march 2022 • april 2022 • may 2022 • june 2022 • july 2022 • august 2022 • september 2022 • october 2022 • november 2022 • december 2022 • january 2023 • february 2023 • march 2023 • april 2023 • may 2023 • june 2023 • july 2023 • august 2023 • september 2023 • october 2023 • november 2023 • december 2023 • january 2024 • february 2024 • march 2024 • april 2024 • may 2024 • june 2024 • july 2024 • august 2024 • september 2024 • october 2024 • november 2024 • december 2024 • january 2025 • february 2025 • march 2025 • april 2025 archives of posted stories: wikipedia:in the news/posted/archives this page contains a section for each day and a sub-section for each nomination. to see the size and title of each section, please expand the following section size summary. nominator's comments: per wp:itn/r#marathons , and a course record was broken ahuman00 ( talk ) 19:24, 22 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] nominator's comments: the attack is among the deadliest targeting civilians in kashmir in recent years and is the deadliest attack in the valley after the revocation of the special status of jammu and kashmir . ridh-1 ( talk ) 17:03, 22 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] nominator's comments: he was one of the greatest and most famous sculptors of the late 20th and early 21st centuries. his famous works include chronicle of georgia and st. george statue in tbilisi, the tear of grief in bayonne, new jersey , birth of the new world in arecibo, puerto rico and birth of a new man in seville . -- kiril simeonovski ( talk ) 09:04, 22 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] the following discussion is closed. please do not modify it. subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. no further edits should be made to this discussion. nominator's comments: wife of the first president of singapore – robertsky ( talk ) 01:28, 22 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] nominator's comments: swiss philologist, specialist in german studies, and author grimes2 ( talk ) 18:16, 22 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] thriley ( talk ) 06:29, 22 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] the following discussion is closed. please do not modify it. subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. no further edits should be made to this discussion. per the current itn section of wp:errors , this sub-section is being opened so the community can discuss and assess article quality for a possible blurb target change to death and funeral of pope francis . the relevant change would look like this . left guide ( talk ) 00:26, 23 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] the following discussion is closed. please do not modify it. subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. no further edits should be made to this discussion. nominator's comments: unprecedented title, "breaking the chinese dominance". article in good conditions. arionstar ( talk ) 23:29, 20 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] nominator's comments: belgian art collector and founder of the ucca center for contemporary art . 240f:7a:6253:1:e0d6:217:d193:e673 ( talk ) 09:09, 22 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] the following discussion is closed. please do not modify it. subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. no further edits should be made to this discussion. nominator's comments: article has some length, could be a little longer but no citation issues. former lt. gov of alabama yoblyblob ( talk ) :) 17:57, 19 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] the following discussion is closed. please do not modify it. subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. no further edits should be made to this discussion. babbaq ( talk ) 09:39, 20 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] nominator's comments: northern irish singer who represented the united kingdom at the eurovision song contest. 240f:7a:6253:1:65e2:9d15:f64e:9d6 ( talk ) 07:23, 20 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] nominator's comments: croatian international professional footballer. 240f:7a:6253:1:c99e:58bc:c5a1:6e9c ( talk ) 12:51, 19 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] nominator's comments: american journalist. death reported 18 april. thriley ( talk ) 03:15, 19 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] nominator's comments: death announced 17 april. thriley ( talk ) 16:55, 22 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] nominator's comments: austrian composer who settled in berlin and became a leader in experimental music running an ensemble, a publishing house, festivals, and teaching internationally. good new refs. -- gerda arendt ( talk ) 14:43, 21 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] abcmaxx ( talk ) 12:56, 18 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] nominator's comments: palestinian photojournalist. the subject of the upcoming film put your soul on your hand and walk . thriley ( talk ) 04:26, 18 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] the following discussion is closed. please do not modify it. subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. no further edits should be made to this discussion. the following discussion is closed. please do not modify it. subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. no further edits should be made to this discussion. nominator's comments: american jazz critic. death reported 16 april. thriley ( talk ) 18:04, 17 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] nominator's comments: former member of the gabon national football team . 240f:7a:6253:1:c153:5b:90e6:3807 ( talk ) 14:28, 17 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] the following discussion is closed. please do not modify it. subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. no further edits should be made to this discussion. support blurb "even though all the sources are covering this, my personal opinion is that this is not a big deal and the reaction is overblown" is not a policy-based rationale and !votes on that basis should not be considered in the consensus assessment. the ruling has a global impact on the future of trans rights jurisprudence and is being widely covered in global reliable sources, because its undercurrent is a popular culture war (spearheaded by figures like jk rowling) that spans borders. flip and flopped ㋡ 18:46, 17 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] the following discussion is closed. please do not modify it. subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. no further edits should be made to this discussion. nominator's comments: a national artist has passed away. hurricaneedgar 15:38, 16 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] xrisk ( talk ) 07:23, 17 april 2025 (utc) [ reply ] an inline citation means any citation added close to the material it supports, for example after the sentence or paragraph, normally in the form of a footnote. nominators often include links to external websites and other references in discussions on this page. it is usually best to provide such links using the inline url syntax [http://example.com] rather than using <ref></ref> tags , because that keeps all the relevant information in the same place as the nomination without having to jump to this section, and facilitates the archiving process. for the times when <ref></ref> tags are being used, here are their contents:

april 23 is the 113th day of the year (114th in leap years ) in the gregorian calendar ; 252 days remain until the end of the year.

national sovereignty and children's day ( turkish : ulusal egemenlik ve çocuk bayramı ) is a public holiday in turkey commemorating the foundation of the grand national assembly of turkey , on 23 april 1920. it is also observed by northern cyprus . [ 1 ] 23 april is the day that the grand national assembly of turkey was founded in 1920. the national council denounced the government of the ottoman sultan mehmed vi and announced a temporary constitution. [ 2 ] during the war of independence , grand national assembly met in ankara and laid down the foundations of a new, independent, secular and modern republic from the ashes of the ottoman empire . following the defeat of the allied invasion forces on september 9, 1922 and the signing of the treaty of lausanne on july 24, 1923, the turkish government started the task of establishing the institutions of a state. [ 2 ] 23 april was declared "national sovereignty day" on may 2, 1921. [ 3 ] since 1927, the holiday has also been celebrated as children's day . [ 4 ] thus, turkey became the first country to officially declare children's day a national holiday. [ 5 ] in 1981, the holiday was officially named "national sovereignty and children's day". [ 3 ] 23 april is celebrated as national sovereignty and children's day in turkey and northern cyprus. the kosovar turks in the republic of kosovo use the day as "kosovar turk day". [ 6 ] after kosovo declared independence in 2008, the government let all ethnicities in the nation pick a day and celebrate it for their ethnic groups and 23 april got picked for the kosovar turks. since 23 april 2009, it is a national holiday. [ 7 ] every year, children in turkey celebrate national sovereignty and children's day as a national holiday. similar to other april events, children's day celebrations are often held outdoors. [ 8 ] schools participate in week-long ceremonies marked by performances in all fields in large stadiums watched by the entire nation. [ 8 ] students decorate their classrooms with flags, balloons and handmade ornaments. [ 9 ] [ 10 ] anıtkabir is visited by children and politicians every year. [ 11 ] among the activities on this day, the children send their representatives to replace state officials and high ranking civil servants in their offices. the president , the cabinet ministers, provincial governors, and mayors all turn over their positions to children's representatives in a purely ceremonial exercise. [ 12 ] on this day, children also replace the parliamentarians in the grand national assembly and hold a ceremonial special session to discuss matters concerning children's issues. [ 13 ] [ 14 ] after unesco proclaimed 1979 as the international year of the child , the turkish radio and television corporation (trt) organized the first trt international april 23 children's festival . [ 15 ] five countries participated in this first holiday. over the years, this number grew steadily, resulting in children from about 50 countries coming to turkey in an official ceremony every year to participate in the festival. during the time, children stay with turkish families and interact with the turkish children and learn about each other's countries and cultures. [ 16 ] [ 17 ] the foreign children groups also participate in the ceremonial session of the grand national assembly. [ 18 ]

1920 ( mcmxx ) was a leap year starting on thursday of the gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on wednesday of the julian calendar , the 1920th year of the common era (ce) and anno domini (ad) designations, the 920th year of the 2nd millennium , the 20th year of the 20th century , and the 1st year of the 1920s decade. as of the start of 1920, the gregorian calendar was 13 days ahead of the julian calendar, which remained in localized use until 1923.

original file (805 × 604 pixels, file size: 81 kb, mime type: image/jpeg ) العربية ∙ বাংলা ∙ català ∙ čeština ∙ deutsch ∙ english ∙ español ∙ eesti ∙ فارسی ∙ suomi ∙ français ∙ hrvatski ∙ magyar ∙ bahasa indonesia ∙ italiano ∙ 日本語 ∙ 한국어 ∙ lietuvių ∙ македонски ∙ മലയാളം ∙ မြန်မာဘာသာ ∙ nederlands ∙ polski ∙ português ∙ русский ∙ sicilianu ∙ српски / srpski ∙ svenska ∙ türkçe ∙ українська ∙ tiếng việt ∙ 中文 ∙ 中文（简体） ∙ 中文（繁體） ∙ 中文（臺灣） ∙ +/− click on a date/time to view the file as it appeared at that time. more than 100 pages use this file. the following list shows the first 100 pages that use this file only. a full list is available.

